VIII

GENOA
Genova la Superba -- Genoa the Proud -- an epithet not inappropriate for this
city of merchant princes of olden days, which was once the emporium of the
Tyrrhenian, as was Venice of the Adriatic sea, and the rival of the latter
for the commerce of the Eastern Mediterranean. No two cities, adapted to
play a similar part in history, could be more unlike in their natural
environments: Venice clustered on a series of mud banks, parted by an
expanse of water from a low coast-line, beyond which the far-away
mountains rise dimly in the distance, a fleet, as it were, of houses
anchored in the shallows of the Adriatic; Genoa stretching along the shore
by the deepening water, at the very feet of the Apennines, climbing up
their slopes, and crowning their lower summits with its watch-towers. No
seaport in Italy possesses a site so rich in natural beauty, not even
Spezzia in its bay, for though the scenery in the neighborhood certainly
surpasses that around Genoa, the town itself is built upon an almost level
plain; not even Naples itself, notwithstanding the magnificent sweep of
its bay, dominated by the volcanic cone of Vesuvius, and bounded by the
limestone crags of the range of Monte S. Angelo. Genoa, however, like all
places and persons, has had its detractors. Perhaps of no town has a more
bitter sarcasm been uttered, than the well known one, which no doubt
originated in the mouth of some envious Tuscan, when the two peoples were
contending for the mastery of the western sea, and the maker of the
epigram was on the losing side. Familiar as it is to many, we will venture
to quote it again, as it may be rendered in our own tongue: "Treeless
hills, a fishless sea, faithless men, shameless women." As to the reproach
in the first clause, one must admit there is still some truth; and in
olden days, when gardens were fewer and more land was left in its natural
condition, there may have been even more point. The hills around Genoa
undoubtedly seem a little barren, when compared with those on the Riviera
some miles farther to the south, with their extraordinary luxuriance of
vegetation, their endless slopes of olives, which only cease to give place
to oak and pine and myrtle. There is also, I believe, some truth in the
second clause; but as to the rest it is not for a comparative stranger to
express an opinion. So far however as the men are concerned the reproach
is not novel. Centuries since, Liguria, of which Genoa is the principal
town, was noted for the cunning and treacherous disposition of its people,
who ethnologically differ considerably from their neighbors. In Virgil's
"Ã†neid" a Ligurian chief shows more cunning than courage in a fight with
an Amazon, and is thus apostrophized before receiving his death-blow from
a woman's hand: "In vain, O shifty one, hast thou tried thy hereditary
craft." The people of this part of Italy form one of a series of
ethnological islands; where a remnant, by no means inconsiderable, of an
earlier race has survived the invading flood of a stronger people. This
old-world race -- commonly called the Iberian -- is characteristically short
in stature, dark in hair, eyes, and complexion. Representatives of it
survive in Brittany, Wales, Ireland, the Basque Provinces, and other
out-of-the-way corners of Europe; insulated or pressed back, till they
could no farther go, by the advance of the Aryan race, by some or other
representative of which Europe is now peopled. On the Ligurian coast,
however, as might be expected, in the track of two thousand years of
commerce and civilization, the races, however different in origin and
formerly naturally hostile, have been almost fused together by
intermarriage; and this, at any rate in Genoa, seems to have had a
fortuitous result in the production of an exceptionally good-looking
people, especially in the case of the younger women. I well remember some
years since, when driving out on a summer evening on the western side of
Genoa, to have passed crowds of women, most of them young, returning from
work in the factories, and certainly I never saw so large a proportion of
beautiful faces as there were among them.

Genoa for at least two thousand years has been an important center of
commerce; though, of course, like most other places, it has not been
uniformly prosperous. It fell under the Roman power about two centuries
before the Christian era, the possession of it for a time being disputed
with the Carthaginians; then it became noted as a seaport town for the
commerce of the western part of the Mediterranean, it declined and
suffered during the decadence and fall of the Empire, and then gradually
rose into eminence during the Middle Ages. Even in the tenth century
Genoa was an important community; its citizens, as beseemed men who were
hardy sailors, found a natural pleasure in any kind of disturbance; they
joined in the Crusades, and turned religious enthusiasm to commercial
profit by the acquisition of various towns and islands in the East. The
rather unusual combination of warrior and merchant, which the Genoese of
the Middle Ages present, is no doubt due not only to social character, but
also to exceptional circumstances. "The constant invasions of the Saracens
united the professions of trade and war, and its greatest merchants became
also its greatest generals, while its naval captains were also merchants."

Genoa, as may be supposed, had from the first to contend with two
formidable rivals: the one being Pisa in its own waters; the other Venice,
whose citizens were equally anxious for supremacy in the Levant and the
commerce of the East. With both these places the struggle was long and
fierce, but the fortune of war on the whole was distinctly favorable to
Genoa nearer home, and unfavorable in regard to the more distant foe. Pisa
was finally defeated in the neighborhood of Leghorn, and in the year 1300
had to cede to her enemy a considerable amount of territory, including the
island of Corsica; while Venice, after more than a century of conflict
with very varying fortune, at last succeeded in obtaining the supremacy in
the Eastern Mediterranean.

The internal history of the city during all this period was not more
peaceful than its external. Genoa presents the picture of a house divided
against itself; and, strange to say, falsifies the proverb by prospering
instead of perishing. If there were commonly wars without, there were yet
more persistent factions within. Guelphs, headed by the families of
Grimaldi and Fieschi, and Ghibellines, by those of Spinola and Doria,
indulged in faction-fights and sometimes in civil warfare, until at last
some approach to peace was procured by the influence of Andrea Doria, who,
in obtaining the freedom of the state from French control, brought about
the adoption of most important constitutional changes, which tended to
obliterate the old and sharply divided party lines. Yet even he narrowly
escaped overthrow from a conspiracy, headed by one of the Fieschi; his
great-nephew and heir was assassinated, and his ultimate triumph was due
rather to a fortunate accident, which removed from the scene the leader of
his opponents, than to his personal power. Then the tide of prosperity
began to turn against the Genoese. The Turk made himself master of their
lands and cities in the East. Venice ousted them from the commerce of the
Levant. War arose with France, and the city itself was captured by that
power in the year 1684. The following century was far from being a
prosperous time for Genoa, and near the close it opened its gates to the
Republican troops, a subjugation which ultimately resulted in no little
suffering to the inhabitants.

Genoa at that time was encircled on the land side by a double line of
fortifications, a considerable portion of which still remains. The outer
one, with its associated detached forts, mounted up the inland slopes to
an elevation of some hundreds of feet above the sea, and within this is an
inner line of much greater antiquity. As it was for those days a place of
exceptional strength, its capture became of the first importance, in the
great struggle between France and Austria, as a preliminary to driving the
Republican troops out of Italy. The city was defended by the French under
the command of Massena; it was attacked on the land side by the
Imperialist force, while it was blockaded from the sea by the British
fleet. After fifteen days of hard fighting among the neighboring
Apennines, Massena was finally shut up in the city. No less desperate
fighting followed around the walls, until at last the defending force was
so weakened by its losses that further aggressive operations became
impossible on its part, and the siege was converted into a blockade. The
results were famine and pestilence. A hundred thousand persons were cooped
up within the walls. "From the commencement of the siege the price of
provisions had been extravagantly high, and in its latter days grain of
any sort could not be had at any cost.... The neighboring rocks within the
walls were covered with a famished crowd, seeking, in the vilest animals
and the smallest traces of vegetation, the means of assuaging their
intolerable pangs.... In the general agony, not only leather and skins of
every kind were consumed, but the horror at human flesh was so much abated
that numbers were supported on the dead bodies of their fellow citizens.
Pestilence, as usual, came in the rear of famine, and contagious fevers
swept off multitudes, whom the strength of the survivors was unable to
inter." Before the obstinate defense was ended, and Massena, at the end of
all his resources, was compelled to capitulate on honorable terms, twenty
thousand of the inhabitants had perished from hunger or disease. The end
of this terrible struggle brought little profit to the conquerors, for
before long the battle of Marengo, and the subsequent successes of
Napoleon in Northern Italy, led to the city being again surrendered to the
French. It had to endure another siege at the end of Napoleon's career,
for in 1814 it was attacked by English troops under Lord William
Bentinck. Fortunately for the inhabitants, the French commander decided to
surrender after a few days' severe struggle around the outer defenses. On
the settlement of European affairs which succeeded the final fall of
Napoleon, Genoa was annexed to the kingdom of Sardinia, and now forms part
of united Italy; though, it is said, the old instincts of the people give
them a theoretic preference for a republican form of government.

Genoa, like so many of the chief Italian towns, has been greatly altered
during the last twenty-five years. Its harbors have been much enlarged;
its defenses have been extended far beyond their ancient limits. Down by
the water-side, among the narrow streets on the shelving ground that
fringes the sea, we are still in old Genoa -- the city of the merchant
princes of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries; but higher up the slopes
a new town has sprung up, with broad streets and fine modern houses, and a
"corso," bordered by trees and mansions, still retains in its zigzag
outline the trace of the old fortifications which enclosed the arm of
Massena. More than one spot, on or near this elevated road, commands a
splendid outlook over the city and neighborhood.

From such a position the natural advantages of the site of Genoa, the
geographical conditions which have almost inevitably determined its
history, can be apprehended at a glance. Behind us rise steeply, as has
been already said, the hills forming the southernmost zone of the
Apennines. This, no doubt, is a defect in a military point of view,
because the city is commanded by so many positions of greater elevation;
but this defect was less serious in ancient days, when the range of
ordnance was comparatively short; while the difficulty of access which
these positions presented, and the obstacles which the mountain barrier of
the Apennines offered to the advance of an enemy from the comparatively
distant plains of Piedmont, rendered the city far more secure than it may
at first sight have appeared. Beneath us lies a deeply recessed bay, in
outline like the half of an egg, guarded on the east by a projecting
shoulder; while on the western side hills descend, at first rapidly, then
more gently, to a point which projects yet farther to the south. This
eastern shoulder is converted into a kind of peninsula, rudely triangular
in shape, by the valley of the Bisagno, a stream of considerable size
which thus forms a natural moat for the fortifications on the eastern side
of the town. In a bay thus sheltered on three sides by land, vessels were
perfectly safe from most of the prevalent winds; and it was only necessary
to carry out moles from the western headland and from some point on the
eastern shore, to protect them also from storms which might blow from the
south. The first defense was run out from the latter side, and still bears
the name of the Molo Vecchio; then the port was enlarged, by carrying out
another mole from the end of the western headland; this has been greatly
extended, so that the town may now be said to possess an inner and an
outer harbor. From the parapet of the Corso these topographical facts are
seen at a glance, as we look over the tall and densely-massed houses to
the busy quays, and the ships which are moored alongside. Such a scene
cannot fail to be attractive, and the lighthouse, rising high above the
western headland, is less monotonous in outline than is usual with such
buildings, and greatly enhances the effect of the picture. The city,
however, when regarded from this elevated position is rather wanting in
variety. We look down over a crowded mass of lofty houses, from which,
indeed, two or three domes or towers rise up; but there is not enough
diversity in the design of the one, or a sufficiently marked pre-eminence
in the others, to afford a prospect which is comparable with that of many
other ancient cities. Still some variety is given by the trees, which here
and there, especially towards the eastern promontory, are interspersed
among the houses; while the Ligurian coast on the one hand, and the
distant summits of the Maritime Alps on the other, add to the scene a
never-failing charm.

Of the newer part of the town little more need be said. It is like the
most modern part of any Continental city, and only differs from the
majority of these by the natural steepness and irregularity of the site.
In Genoa, except for a narrow space along the shore, one can hardly find a
plot of level ground. Now that the old limits of the enceinte have been
passed, it is still growing upwards; but beyond and above the farthest
houses the hills are still crowned by fortresses, keeping watch and ward
over the merchant city. These, of course, are of modern date; but some of
them have been reconstructed on the ancient sites, and still encrust, as
can be seen at a glance, towers and walls which did their duty in the
olden times. For a season, indeed, there was more to be protected than
merchandise, for, till lately, Genoa was the principal arsenal of the
Italian kingdom; but this has now been removed to Spezzia. Italy, however,
does not seem to feel much confidence in that immunity from plunder which
has been sometimes accorded to "open towns," or in the platitudes of
peace-mongers; and appears to take ample precautions that an enemy in
command of the sea shall not thrust his hand into a full purse without a
good chance of getting nothing better than crushed fingers.

But in the lower town we are still in the Genoa of the olden time. There
is not, indeed, very much to recall the city of the more strictly mediÃ¦val
epoch; though two churches date from days before the so-called
"Renaissance," and are good examples of its work. Most of what we now see
belongs to the Genoa of the sixteenth century; or, at any rate, is but
little anterior in age to this. The lower town, however, even where its
buildings are comparatively modern, still retains in plan -- in its narrow,
sometimes irregular, streets; in its yet narrower alleys, leading by
flights of steps up the steep hill side; in its crowded, lofty houses; in
its "huddled up" aspect, for perhaps no single term can better express our
meaning -- the characteristics of an ancient Italian town. In its streets
even the summer sun -- let the proverb concerning the absence of the sun and
the presence of the doctor say what it may -- can seldom scorch, and the
bitter north wind loses its force among the maze of buildings. Open spaces
of any kind are rare; the streets, in consequence of their narrowness, are
unusually thronged, and thus produce the idea of a teeming population;
which, indeed, owing to the general loftiness of the houses, is large in
proportion to the area. They are accordingly ill-adapted for the
requirements of modern traffic.

Genoa, like Venice, is noted for its palazzi -- for the sumptuous
dwellings inhabited by the burgher aristocracy of earlier days, which are
still, in not a few cases, in possession of their descendants. But in
style and in position nothing can be more different. We do not refer to
the obvious distinction that in the one city the highway is water, in the
other it is dry land; or to the fact that buildings in the so-called
Gothic style are common in Venice, but are not to be found among the
mansions of Genoa. It is rather to this, that the Via Nuova, which in this
respect holds the same place in Genoa as the Grand Canal does in Venice,
is such a complete contrast to it, that they must be compared by their
opposites. The latter is a broad and magnificent highway, affording a full
view and a comprehensive survey of the stately buildings which rise from
its margin. The former is a narrow street, corresponding in dimensions
with one of the less important among the side canals in the other city. It
is thus almost impossible to obtain any good idea of the faÃ§ade of the
Genoese palazzi. The passing traveller has about as much chance of doing
this as he would have of studying the architecture of Mincing Lane; and
even if he could discover a quiet time, like Sunday morning in the City,
he would still have to strain his neck by staring upwards at the
overhanging mass of masonry, and find a complete view of any one building
almost impossible. But so far as these palazzi can be seen, how far do
they repay examination? It is a common-place with travellers to expatiate
on the magnificence of the Via Nuova, and one or two other streets in
Genoa. There is an imposing magniloquence in the word palazzo, and a
"street of palaces" is a formula which impels many minds to render instant
homage.

But, speaking for myself, I must own to being no great admirer of this
part of Genoa; to me the design of these palazzi appears often heavy and
oppressive. They are sumptuous rather than dignified, and impress one more
with the length of the purse at the architect's command than with the
quality of his genius or the fecundity of his conceptions. No doubt there
are some fine buildings -- the Palazzo Spinola, the Palazzo Doria Tursi, the
Palazzo del' Universita, and the Palazzo Balbi, are among those most
generally praised. But if I must tell the plain, unvarnished truth, I
never felt and never shall feel much enthusiasm for the "city of palaces."
It has been some relief to me to find that I am not alone in this heresy,
as it will appear to some. For on turning to the pages of Fergusson, 
immediately after penning the above confession, I read for the first time
the following passage (and it must be admitted that, though not free from
occasional "cranks" as to archÃ¦ological questions, he was a critic of
extensive knowledge and no mean authority): -- "When Venice adopted the
Renaissance style, she used it with an aristocratic elegance that relieves
even its most fantastic forms in the worst age. In Genoa there is a
pretentious parvenu vulgarity, which offends in spite of considerable
architectural merit. Their size, their grandeur, and their grouping may
force us to admire the palaces of Genoa; but for real beauty or
architectural propriety of design they will not stand a moment's
comparison with the contemporary or earlier palaces of Florence, Rome, or
Venice." Farther on he adds very truly, after glancing at the rather
illegitimate device by which the faÃ§ades have been rendered more effective
by the use of paint, instead of natural color in the materials employed,
as in the older buildings of Venice, he adds: -- "By far the most beautiful
feature of the greater palaces of Genoa is their courtyards" (a feature
obviously which can only make its full appeal to a comparatively limited
number of visitors), "though these, architecturally, consist of nothing
but ranges of arcades, resting on attenuated Doric pillars. These are
generally of marble, sometimes grouped in pairs, and too frequently with a
block of an entablature over each, under the springing of the arch; but
notwithstanding these defects, a cloistered court is always and inevitably
pleasing, and if combined with gardens and scenery beyond, which is
generally the case in this city, the effect, as seen from the streets, is
so poetic as to disarm criticism. All that dare be said is that, beautiful
as they are, with a little more taste and judgment they might have been
ten times more so than they are now."

 

Several of these palazzi contain pictures and art-collections of
considerable value, and the interest of those has perhaps enhanced the
admiration which they have excited in visitors. One of the most noteworthy
is the Palazzo Brignole Sale, commonly called the Palazzo Rosso, because
its exterior is painted red. This has now become a memorial of the
munificence of its former owner, the Duchess of Galliera, a member of the
Brignole Sale family, who, with the consent of her husband and relations,
in the year 1874 presented this palace and its contents to the city of
Genoa, with a revenue sufficient for its maintenance. The Palazzo Reale,
in the Via Balbi, is one of those where the garden adds a charm to an
otherwise not very striking, though large, edifice. This, formerly the
property of the Durazzo family, was purchased by Charles Albert, King of
Sardinia, and has thus become a royal residence. The Palazzo Ducale, once
inhabited by the Doges of Genoa, has now been converted into public
offices, and the palazzo opposite to the Church of St. Matteo bears an
inscription which of itself gives the building an exceptional interest:
"Senat. Cons. AndreÃ¦ de Oria, patriÃ¦ liberatori, munus publicum." It is
this, the earlier home of the great citizen of Genoa, of which Rogers has
written in the often-quoted lines: -- 

 "He left it for a better; and 'tis now
 A house of trade, the meanest merchandise
 Cumbering its floors. Yet, fallen as it is,
 'Tis still the noblest dwelling -- even in Genoa!
 And hadst thou, Andrea, lived there to the last,
 Thou hadst done well: for there is that without,
 That in the wall, which monarchs could not give
 Nor thou take with thee -- that which says aloud,
 It was thy country's gift to her deliverer!"

The great statesman lies in the neighboring church, with other members of
his family, and over the high altar hangs the sword which was given to him
by the Pope. The church was greatly altered -- embellished it was doubtless
supposed -- by Doria himself; but the old cloisters, dating from the
earliest part of the fourteenth century, still remain intact. The grander
palazzo which he erected, as an inscription outside still informs us, was
in a more open, and doubtless then more attractive, part of the city. In
the days of Doria it stood in ample gardens, which extended on one side
down to a terrace overlooking the harbor, on the other some distance up
the hillside. From the back of the palace an elaborate structure of
ascending flight of steps in stone led up to a white marble colossal
statue of Hercules, which from this elevated position seemed to keep watch
over the home of the Dorias and the port of Genoa. All this is sadly
changed; the admiral would now find little pleasure in his once stately
home. It occupies a kind of peninsula between two streams of
twentieth-century civilization. Between the terrace wall and the sea the
railway connecting the harbor with the main line has intervened, with its
iron tracks, its sheds, and its shunting-places -- a dreary unsightly
outlook, for the adjuncts of a terminus are usually among the most ugly
appendages of civilization. The terraced staircase on the opposite side of
the palace has been swept away by the main line of the railway, which
passes within a few yards of its faÃ§ade, thus severing the gardens and
isolating the shrine of Hercules, who looks down forlornly on the result
of labors which even he might have deemed arduous, while snorting,
squealing engines pass and repass -- beasts which to him would have seemed
more formidable than LernÃ¦an hydra or Nemaean lion.

The palace follows the usual Genoese rule of turning the better side
inwards, and offering the less attractive to the world at large. The
landward side, which borders a narrow street, and thus, one would
conjecture, must from the first have been connected with the upper gardens
by a bridge, or underground passage, is plain, almost heavy, in its
design, but it does not rise to so great an elevation as is customary with
the palazzi in the heart of the city. The side which is turned towards the
sea is a much more attractive composition, for it is associated with the
usual cloister of loggia which occupies three sides of an oblong. This, as
the ground slopes seaward, though on the level of the street outside,
stands upon a basement story, and communicates by flights of steps with
the lower gardens. The latter are comparatively small, and in no way
remarkable; but in the days -- not so very distant -- when their terraces
looked down upon the Mediterranean, when the city and its trade were on a
smaller scale, when the picturesque side of labor had not yet been
extruded by the dust and grime of over-much toil, no place in Genoa could
have been more pleasant for the evening stroll, or for dreamy repose in
some shaded nook during the heat of the day. The palazzo itself shows
signs of neglect -- the family, I believe, have for some time past ceased to
use it for a residence; two or three rooms are still retained in their
original condition, but the greater part of the building is let off. In
the corridor, near the entrance, members of the Doria family, dressed in
classic garb, in conformity with the taste which prevailed in the
sixteenth century, are depicted in fresco upon the walls. On the roof of
the grand saloon Jupiter is engaged in overthrowing the Titans. These
frescoes are the work of Perini del Vaga, a pupil of Raphael. The great
admiral, the builder of the palace, is represented among the figures in
the corridor, and by an oil painting in the saloon, which contains some
remains of sumptuous furniture and a few ornaments of interest. He was a
burly man, with a grave, square, powerful face, such a one as often looks
out at us from the canvas of Titian or of Tintoret -- a man of kindly
nature, but masterful withal; cautious and thoughtful, but a man of action
more than of the schools or of the library; one little likely to be swayed
by passing impulse or transient emotion, but clear and firm of purpose,
who meant to attain his end were it in mortal to command success, and
could watch and wait for the time. Such men, if one may trust portraits
and trust history, were not uncommon in the great epoch when Europe was
shaking itself free from the fetters of mediÃ¦val influences, and was
enlarging its mental no less than its physical horizon. Such men are the
makers of nations, and not only of their own fortunes; they become rarer
in the days of frothy stump oratory and hysteric sentiment, when a people
babbles as it sinks into senile decrepitude.

Andrea Doria himself -- "Il principe" as he was styled -- had a long and in
some respects a checkered career. In his earlier life he obtained
distinction as a successful naval commander, and in the curious
complications which prevailed in those days among the Italian States and
their neighbors ultimately became Admiral of the French fleet. But he
found that Genoa would obtain little good from the French King, who was
then practically its master; so he transferred his allegiance to the
Emperor Charles, and by his aid expelled from his native city the troops
with which he had formerly served. So great was his influence in Genoa
that he might easily have obtained supreme power; but at this, like a true
patriot, he did not grasp, and the Constitution, which was adopted under
his influence, gradually put an end to the bitter party strife which had
for so long been the plague of Genoa, and it remained in force until the
French Revolution. Still, notwithstanding the gratitude generally felt for
his great services to the State, he experienced in his long life -- for he
died at the age of ninety-two -- the changefulness of human affairs. He had
no son, and his heir and grand-nephew -- a young man -- was unpopular, and, as
is often the case, the sapling was altogether inferior in character to the
withering tree. The members of another great family -- the Fieschi -- entered
into a conspiracy, and collected a body of armed men on the pretext of an
expedition against the corsairs who for so long were the pests of the
Mediterranean. The outbreak was well planned; on New Year's night, in the
year 1547, the chief posts in the city were seized. Doria himself was just
warned in time, and escaped capture; but his heir was assassinated, and
his enemies seemed to have triumphed. But their success was changed to
failure by an accident. Count Fiescho in passing along a plank to a galley
in the harbor made a false step, and fell into the sea. In those days the
wearing of armor added to the perils of the deep; the count sank like a
stone, and so left the conspirators without a leader exactly at the most
critical moment. They were thus before long defeated and dispersed, and
had to experience the truth of the proverb, "Who breaks pays," for in
those days men felt little sentimental tenderness for leaders of sedition
and disturbers of the established order. The Fieschi were exiled, and
their palace was razed to the ground. So the old admiral returned to his
home and his terrace-walk overlooking the sea, until at last his long life
ended, and they buried him with his fathers in the Church of S. Matteo.

Not far from the Doria Palace is the memorial to another admiral, of fame
more world-wide than that of Doria. In the open space before the railway
station -- a building, a faÃ§ade of which is not without architectural
merit -- rises a handsome monument in honor of Christopher Columbus. He was
not strictly a native of the city, but he was certainly born on Genoese
soil, and, as it seems to be now agreed, at Cogoleto, a small village a
few miles west of the city. He was not, however, able to convince the
leaders of his own State that there were wide parts of the world yet to be
discovered; and it is a well-known story how for a long time he preached
to deaf ears, and found, like most heralds of startling physical facts,
his most obstinate opponents among the ecclesiastics of his day. Spain at
last, after Genoa and Portugal and England had all refused, placed
Columbus in command of a voyage of discovery; and on Spanish ground
also -- in neglect and comparative poverty, worn out by toil and
anxieties -- the great explorer ended his checkered career. Genoa, however,
though inattentive to the comparatively obscure enthusiast, has not failed
to pay honor to the successful discoverer; and is glad to catch some
reflected light from the splendor of successes to the aid of which she did
not contribute. In this respect, however, the rest of the world cannot
take up their parable at her; men generally find that on the whole it is
less expensive, and certainly less troublesome, to build the tombs of the
prophets, instead of honoring them while alive; then, indeed, whether
bread be asked or no, a stone is often given. So now the effigy of
Columbus stands on high among exotic plants, where all the world can see,
for it is the first thing encountered by the traveller as he quits the
railway station.

One of the most characteristic -- if not one of the sweetest -- places in
Genoa is the long street, which, under more than one name, intervenes
between the last row of houses in the town and the harbor. From the latter
it is, indeed, divided by a line of offices and arched halls; these are
covered by a terrace-roof and serve various purposes more or less directly
connected with the shipping. The front walls of houses which rise high on
the landward side are supported by rude arches. Thus, as is so common in
Italian towns, there is a broad foot-walk, protected alike from sun and
rain, replacing the "ground-floor front," with dark shops at the back, and
stalls, for the sale of all sorts of odds and ends, pitched in the spaces
between the arches. In many towns these arcades are often among the most
ornamental features; but in Genoa, though not without a certain
quaintness, they are so rude in design and construction that they hardly
deserve this title. The old Dogana, one of the buildings in the street,
gives a good idea of the commercial part of Genoa before the days of
steam, and has a considerable interest of its own. In the first place, it
is a standing memorial of the bitter feud between Genoa and Venice, for it
is built with the stones of a castle which, being captured by the one from
the other, was pulled down and shipped to Genoa in the year 1262. Again,
within its walls was the Banca di San Georgio, which had its origin in a
municipal debt incurred in order to equip an expedition to stop the forays
of a family named Grimaldi, who had formed a sort of Cave of Adullam at
Monaco. The institution afterwards prospered, and held in trust most of
the funds for charitable purposes, till "the French passed their sponge
over the accounts, and ruined all the individuals in the community." It
has also an indirect connection with English history, for on the defeat of
the Grimaldi many of their retainers entered the service of France, and
were the Genoese bowmen who fought at Cressy. Lastly, against its walls
the captured chains of the harbor of Pisa were suspended for nearly six
centuries, for they were only restored to their former owners a
comparatively few years since.

Turning up from this part of the city we thread narrow streets, in which
many of the principal shops are still located. We pass, in a busy piazza,
the Loggia dei Banchi Borsa -- the old exchange -- a quaint structure of the
end of the sixteenth century, standing on a raised platform; and proceed
from it into the Via degli Orefici -- a street just like one of the lanes
which lead from Cheapside to Cannon Street, if, indeed, it be not still
narrower, but full of tempting shops. Genoa is noted for its work in
coral and precious metals, but the most characteristic, as all visitors
know, is a kind of filigree work in gold or silver, which is often of
great delicacy and beauty, and is by no means so costly as might be
anticipated from the elaborate workmanship.

The most notable building in Genoa, anterior to the days when the
architecture of the Renaissance was in favor, is the cathedral, which is
dedicated to S. Lorenzo. The western faÃ§ade, which is approached by a
broad flight of steps, is the best exposed to view, the rest of the
building being shut in rather closely after the usual Genoese fashion. It
is built of alternating courses of black and white marble, the only
materials employed for mural decoration, so far as I remember, in the
city. The western faÃ§ade in its lower part is a fine example of "pointed"
work, consisting of a triple portal which, for elegance of design and
richness of ornamentation, could not readily be excelled. It dates from
about the year 1307, when the cathedral was almost rebuilt. The latter, as
a whole, is a very composite structure, for parts of an earlier Romanesque
cathedral still remain, as in the fine "marble" columns of the nave; and
important alterations were made at a much later date. These, to which
belongs the mean clerestory, painted in stripes of black and white, to
resemble the banded courses of stone below, are generally most
unsatisfactory; and here, as in so many other buildings, one is compelled,
however reluctantly, "to bless the old and ban the new." The most richly
decorated portion of the interior is the side chapel, constructed at the
end of the fifteenth century, and dedicated to St. John the Baptist; here
his relics are enshrined for the reverence of the faithful and, as the
guide-books inform us, are placed in a magnificent silver-gilt shrine,
which is carried in solemn procession on the day of his nativity. We are
also informed that women, as a stigma for the part which the sex played in
the Baptist's murder, are only permitted to enter the chapel once in a
year. This is not by any means the only case where the Church of Rome
gives practical expression to its decided view as to which is the superior
sex. The cathedral possesses another great, though now unhappily
mutilated, treasure in the sacro catino . This, in the first place, was
long supposed to have been carved from a single emerald; in the next, it
was a relic of great antiquity and much sanctity; though as to its precise
claims to honor in this respect authorities differed. According to one, it
had been a gift from the Queen of Sheba to Solomon; according to another,
it had contained the paschal lamb at the Last Supper; while a third
asserted that in this dish Joseph of Arimathea had caught the blood which
flowed from the pierced side of the crucified Saviour. Of its great
antiquity there can at least be no doubt, for it was taken by the Genoese
when they plundered CÃ¦sarea so long since as the year 1101, and was then
esteemed the most precious thing in the spoil. The material is a green
glass -- a conclusion once deemed so heretical that any experiment on the
 catino was forbidden on pain of death. As regards its former use, no
more can be said than that it might possibly be as old as the Christian
era. It is almost needless to say that Napoleon carried it away to Paris;
but the worst result of this robbery was that when restitution was made
after the second occupation of that city, the catino , through some gross
carelessness, was so badly packed that it was broken on the journey back,
and has been pieced together by a gold-setting of filigree, according to
the guide-books. An inscription in the nave supplies us with an
interesting fact in the early history of Genoa which perhaps ought not to
be omitted. It is that the city was founded by one Janus, a great grandson
of Noah; and that another Janus, after the fall of Troy, also settled in
it. Colonists from that ill-fated town really seem to have distributed
themselves pretty well over the known world.

More than one of the smaller churches of Genoa is of archÃ¦ological
interest, and the more modern fabric, called L'Annunziata, is extremely
rich in its internal decorations, though these are more remarkable for
their sumptuousness than for their good taste. But one structure calls for
some notice in any account of the city. This is the Campo Santo, or
burial-place of Genoa, situated at some distance without the walls in the
Valley of the Bisagno. A large tract of land on the slope which forms the
right bank of that stream has been converted into a cemetery, and was laid
out on its present plan rather more than twenty-five years since.
Extensive open spaces are enclosed within and divided by corridors with
cloisters; terraces also, connected by flights of steps, lead up to a long
range of buildings situated some distance above the river, in the center
of which is a chapel crowned with a dome, supported internally by large
columns of polished black Como marble. The bodies of the poorer people are
buried in the usual way in the open ground of the cemetery, and the floor
of the corridors appears to cover a continuous series of vaults, closed,
as formerly in our churches, with great slabs of stone; but a very large
number of the dead rest above the ground in vaults constructed on a plan
which has evidently been borrowed from catacombs like those of Rome. There
is, however, this difference, that in the latter the "loculi," or
separate compartments to contain the corpses, were excavated in the rock,
while here they are constructed entirely of masonry. In both cases the
"loculus" is placed with its longer axis parallel to the outer side, as
was occasionally the method in the rock-hewn tombs of Palestine, instead
of having an opening at the narrower end, so that the corpse, whether
coffined or not, lies in the position of a sleeper in the berth of a ship.
After a burial, the loculus, as in the catacombs, is closed, and an
inscription placed on a slab outside. Thus in the Campo Santo at Genoa we
walk through a gallery of tombs. On either hand are ranges of low
elongated niches, rising tier above tier, each bearing a long white marble
tablet, surrounded by a broad border of dark serpentine breccia. The
interior generally is faced with white marble, which is toned down by the
interspaces of the darker material, and the effect produced by these
simple monumental corridors, these silent records of those who have rested
from their labors, is impressive, if somewhat melancholy. In the
cloisters, as a rule, the more sumptuous memorials are to be found. Here
commonly sections of the wall are given up to the monuments of a family,
the vaults, as I infer, being underneath the pavement. These memorials are
often elaborate in design, and costly in their materials. They will be,
and are, greatly admired by those to whose minds sumptuousness is the
chief element in beauty, and rather second-rate execution of conceptions
distinctly third-rate gives no offense. Others, however, will be chiefly
impressed with the inferiority of modern statuary to the better work of
classic ages, and will doubt whether the more ambitious compositions which
met our eyes in these galleries are preferable to the simple dignity of
the mediÃ¦val altar tomb, and the calm repose of its recumbent figure.

The drive to the Campo Santo, in addition to affording a view of one of
the more perfect parts of the old defensive enclosure of Genoa, of which
the Porta Chiappia, one of the smaller gates, may serve as an example,
passes within sight, though at some distance below, one of the few relics
of classic time which the city has retained. This is the aqueduct which
was constructed by the Romans. Some portions of it, so far as can be seen
from below, appear to belong to the original structure; but, as it is
still in use, it has been in many parts more or less reconstructed and
modernized.

The environs of Genoa are pleasant. On both sides, particularly on the
eastern, are country houses with gardens. The western for a time is less
attractive. The suburb of Sanpierdarena is neither pretty nor interesting;
but at Conigliano, and still more at Sestre Ponente, the grimy
finger-marks of commerce become less conspicuous, and Nature is not wholly
expelled by the two-pronged fork of mechanism. Pegli, still farther west,
is a very attractive spot, much frequented in the summer time for
sea-bathing. On this part of the coast the hills in places draw near to
the sea, and crags rise from the water; the rocks are of interest in more
than one respect to the geologist. One knoll of rock rising from the sand
in the Bay of Pra is crowned by an old fortress, and at Pegli itself are
one or two villas of note. Of these the gardens of the Villa Pallavicini
commonly attract visitors. They reward some by stalactite grottoes and
"sheets of water with boats, under artificial caverns, a Chinese pagoda,
and an Egyptian obelisk;" others will be more attracted by the beauty of
the vegetation, for palms and oleanders, myrtles, and camellias, with
many semi-tropical plants, flourish in the open air.

We may regard Genoa as the meeting-place of the two Rivieras. The coast to
the west -- the Riviera di Ponente -- what has now, by the cession of Nice,
become in part French soil, is the better known; but that to the east, the
Riviera di Levante, though less accessible on the whole, and without such
an attractive feature as the Corniche road, in the judgment of some is
distinctly the more beautiful. There is indeed a road which, for a part of
the way, runs near the sea; but the much more indented character of the
coast frequently forces it some distance inland, and ultimately it has to
cross a rather considerable line of hills in order to reach Spezzia. The
outline of the coast, indeed, is perhaps the most marked feature of
difference between the two Rivieras. The hills on the eastern side descend
far more steeply to the water than they do upon the western. They are much
more sharply furrowed with gullies and more deeply indented by inlets of
the sea; thus the construction of a railway from Genoa to Spezzia has been
a work involving no slight labor. There are, it is stated, nearly fifty
tunnels between the two towns, and it is strictly true that for a large
part of the distance north of the latter place the train is more
frequently under than above ground. Here it is actually an advantage to
travel by the slowest train that can be found, for this may serve as an
epitome of the journey by an express: "Out of a tunnel; one glance,
between rocks and olive-groves, up a ravine, into which a picturesque old
village is wedged; another glance down the same to the sea, sparkling in
the sunlight below; a shriek from the engine, and another plunge into
darkness." So narrow are some of these gullies, up which, however, a
village climbs, that, if I may trust my memory, I have seen a train halted
at a station with the engine in the opening of one tunnel and the last car
not yet clear of another.

But the coast, when explored, is full of exquisite nooks, and here and
there, where by chance the hills slightly recede, or a larger valley than
usual comes down to the sea, towns of some size are situated, from which,
as halting-places, the district might be easily explored, for trains are
fairly frequent, and the distances are not great. For a few miles from
Genoa the coast is less hilly than it afterwards becomes; nevertheless,
the traveller is prepared for what lies before him by being conducted from
the main station, on the west side of Genoa, completely beneath the city
to near its eastern wall. Then Nervi is passed, which, like Pegli,
attracts not a few summer visitors, and is a bright and sunny town, with
pleasant gardens and villas. Recco follows, also bright and cheerful,
backed by the finely-outlined hills, which form the long promontory
enclosing the western side of the Bay of Rapallo. Tunnels and villages, as
the railway now plunges into the rock, now skirts the margin of some
little bay, lead first to Rapallo and then to Chiavari, one with its
slender campanile, the other with its old castle. The luxuriance of the
vegetation in all this district cannot fail to attract notice. The slopes
of the hills are grey with olives; oranges replace apples in the orchards,
and in the more sheltered nooks we espy the paler gold of the lemon. Here
are great spiky aloes, there graceful feathering palms; here pines of
southern type, with spreading holm-oaks, and a dozen other evergreen
shrubs.

Glimpse after glimpse of exquisite scenery flashes upon us as we proceed
to Spezzia, but, as already said, its full beauty can only be appreciated
by rambling among the hills or boating along the coast. There is endless
variety, but the leading features are similar: steep hills furrowed by
ravines, craggy headlands and sheltered coves; villages sometimes perched
high on a shoulder, sometimes nestling in a gully; sometimes a campanile,
sometimes a watch-tower; slopes, here clothed with olive groves, here with
their natural covering of pine and oak scrub, of heath, myrtle, and
strawberry-trees. A change also in the nature of the rock diversifies the
scenery, for between Framura and Bonasola occurs a huge mass of
serpentine, which recalls, in its peculiar structure and tints, the crags
near the Lizard in England. This rock is extensively quarried in the
neighborhood of Levanto, and from that little port many blocks are
shipped.

Spezzia itself has a remarkable situation. A large inlet of the sea runs
deep into the land, parallel with the general trend of the hills, and
almost with that of the coast-line. The range which shelters it on the
west narrows as it falls to the headland of Porto Venere, and is extended
yet farther by rocky islands; while on the opposite coast, hills no less,
perhaps yet more, lofty, protect the harbor from the eastern blasts. In
one direction only is it open to the wind, and against this the
comparative narrowness of the inlet renders the construction of artificial
defenses possible. At the very head of this deeply embayed sheet of water
is a small tract of level ground -- the head, as it were, of a
valley -- encircled by steep hills. On this little plain, and by the
waterside, stands Spezzia. Formerly it was a quiet country town, a small
seaport with some little commerce; but when Italy ceased to be a
geographical expression, and became practically one nation, Spezzia was
chosen, wisely it must be admitted, as the site of the chief naval
arsenal. A single glance shows its natural advantages for such a purpose.
Access from the land must always present difficulties, and every road can
be commanded by forts, perched on yet more elevated positions; while a
hostile fleet, as it advances up the inlet, must run the gauntlet of as
many batteries as the defenders can build. Further, the construction of a
breakwater across the middle of the channel at once has been a protection
from the storms, and has compelled all who approach to pass through
straits commanded by cannon. The distance of the town from its outer
defenses and from the open sea seems enough to secure it even from modern
ordnance; so that, until the former are crushed, it cannot be reached by
projectiles. But it must be confessed that the change has not been without
its drawbacks. The Spezzia of to-day may be a more prosperous town than
the Spezzia of a quarter of a century since, but it has lost some of its
beauty. A twentieth-century fortress adds no charm to the scenery, and
does not crown a hill so picturesquely as did a mediÃ¦val castle. Houses
are being built, roads are being made, land is being reclaimed from the
sea for the construction of quays. Thus the place has a generally untidy
aspect; there is a kind of ragged selvage to town and sea, which, at
present, on a near view, is very unsightly. Moreover, the buildings of an
arsenal can hardly be picturesque or magnificent; and great factories,
more or less connected with them, have sprung up in the neighborhood, from
which rise tall red brick chimneys, the campaniles of the twentieth
century. The town itself was never a place of any particular interest; it
has neither fine churches nor old gateways nor picturesque streets -- a
ruinous fort among the olive groves overlooking the streets is all that
can claim to be ancient -- so that its growth has not caused the loss of any
distinctive feature -- unless it be a grove of old oleanders, which were
once a sight to see in summer time. Many of these have now disappeared,
perhaps from natural decay; and the survivors are mixed with orange trees.
These, during late years, have been largely planted about the town. In one
of the chief streets they are growing by the side of the road, like planes
or chestnuts in other towns. The golden fruit and the glossy leaves,
always a delight to see, appear to possess a double charm by contrast with
the arid flags and dusty streets. Ripe oranges in dozens, in hundreds, all
along by the pathway, and within two or three yards of the pavement! Are
the boys of Spezzia exceptionally virtuous? or are these golden apples of
the Hesperides a special pride of the populace, and does "Father Stick"
still rule in home and school, and is this immunity the result of physical
coercion rather than of moral suasion? Be this as it may, I have with mine
own eyes seen golden oranges by hundreds hanging on the trees in the
streets of Spezzia, and would be glad to know how long they would remain
in a like position in those of an English town, among "the most
law-abiding people in the universe!"

But if the vicinity of the town has lost some of its ancient charm, if
modern Spezzia reminds us too much, now of Woolwich, now of a "new
neighborhood" on the outskirts of London, we have but to pass into the
uplands, escaping from the neighborhood of forts, to find the same
beauties as the mountains of this coast ever afford. There the sugar-cane
and the vine, the fig and the olive cease, though the last so abounds that
one might suppose it an indigenous growth; there the broken slopes are
covered with scrub oak and dwarf pine; there the myrtle blossoms, hardly
ceasing in the winter months; there the strawberry-tree shows its waxen
flowers, and is bright in season with its rich crimson berries. Even the
villages add a beauty to the landscape -- at any rate, when regarded from a
distance; some are perched high up on the shoulders of hills, with distant
outlooks over land and sea; others lie down by the water's edge in
sheltered coves, beneath some ruined fort, which in olden time protected
the fisher-folk from the raids of corsairs. Such are Terenza and Lerici,
looking at each other across the waters of the little "Porto;" and many
another village, in which grey and white and pink tinted houses blend into
one pleasant harmony of color. For all this part of the coast is a series
of rocky headlands and tiny bays, one succession of quiet nooks, to which
the sea alone forms a natural highway. Not less irregular, not less
sequestered, is the western coast of the Bay of Spezzia, which has been
already mentioned. Here, at Porto Venere, a little village still carries
us back in its name to classic times; and the old church on the rugged
headland stands upon a site which was once not unfitly occupied by a
temple of the seaborn goddess. The beauty of the scene is enhanced by a
rocky wooded island, the Isola Palmeria, which rises steeply across a
narrow strait; though the purpose to which it has been devoted -- a prison
for convicts -- neither adds to its charm nor awakens pleasant reflections.

To some minds also the harbor itself, busy and bright as the scene often
is, will suggest more painful thoughts than it did in olden days. For it
is no preacher of "peace at any price," and is a daily witness that
millennial days are still far away from the present epoch. Here may be
seen at anchor the modern devices for naval war: great turret-ships and
ironclads, gunboats and torpedo launches -- evils, necessary undoubtedly,
but evils still; outward and visible signs of the burden of taxation,
which is cramping the development of Italy, and is indirectly the heavy
price which it has to pay for entering the ranks of the great Powers of
Europe. These are less picturesque than the old line-of-battle ships, with
their high decks, their tall masts, and their clouds of canvas; still,
nothing can entirely spoil the harbor of Spezzia, and even these floating
castles group pleasantly in the distance with the varied outline of hills
and headlands, which is backed at last, if we look southward, by the grand
outline of a group of veritable mountains -- the Apuan Alps.




IX

THE TUSCAN COAST
The Bay of Spezzia is defined sharply enough on its western side by the
long, hilly peninsula which parts it from the Mediterranean, but as this
makes only a small angle with the general trend of the coast-line, its
termination is less strongly marked on the opposite side. Of its beauties
we have spoken in an earlier article, but there is a little town at the
southern extremity which, in connection with the coast below, has a
melancholy interest to every lover of English literature. Here, at Lerici,
Shelley spent what proved to be the last months of his life. The town
itself, once strongly fortified by its Pisan owners against their foes of
Genoa on the one side and Lucca on the other, is a picturesque spot. The
old castle crowns a headland, guarding the little harbor and overlooking
the small but busy town. At a short distance to the southeast is the Casa
Magni, once a Jesuit seminary, which was occupied by Shelley. Looking
across the beautiful gulf to the hills on its opposite shore and the
island of Porto Venere, but a few miles from the grand group of the
Carrara mountains, in the middle of the luxuriant scenery of the Eastern
Riviera, the house, though in itself not very attractive, was a fit home
for a lover of nature. But Shelley's residence within its walls was too
soon cut short. There are strange tales (like those told with bated breath
by old nurses by the fireside) that as the closing hour approached the
spirits of the unseen world took bodily form and became visible to the
poet's eye; tales of a dark-robed figure standing by his bedside beckoning
him to follow; of a laughing child rising from the sea as he walked by
moonlight on the terrace, clapping its hands in glee; and of other
warnings that the veil which parted him from the spirit world was
vanishing away. Shelley delighted in the sea. On the 1st of July he left
Lerici for Leghorn in a small sailing vessel. On the 8th he set out to
return, accompanied only by his friend, Mr. Williams, and an English lad.
The afternoon was hot and sultry, and as the sun became low a fearful
squall burst upon the neighboring sea. What happened no one exactly knows,
but they never came back to the shore. Day followed day, and the great sea
kept its secret; but at last, on the 22d, the corpse of Shelley was washed
up near Viareggio and that of Williams near Bocca Lerici, three miles
away. It was not till three weeks afterwards that the body of the sailor
lad came ashore. Probably the felucca had either capsized or had been
swamped at the first break of the storm; but when it was found, some three
months afterwards, men said that it looked as if it had been run down, and
even more ugly rumors got abroad that this was no accident, but the work
of some Italians, done in the hope of plunder, as it was expected that the
party had in charge a considerable sum of money. The bodies were at first
buried in the sand with quicklime; but at that time the Tuscan law
required "any object then cast ashore to be burned, as a precaution
against plague," so, by the help of friends, the body of Shelley was
committed to the flames "with fuel and frankincense, wine, salt, and oil,
the accompaniments of a Greek cremation," in the presence of Byron Leigh
Hunt, and Trelawny. The corpse of Williams had been consumed in like
fashion on the previous day. "It was a glorious day and a splendid
prospect; the cruel and calm sea before, the Appennines behind. A curlew
wheeled close to the pyre, screaming, and would not be driven away; the
flames arose golden and towering." The inurned ashes were entombed, as
everyone knows, in the Protestant burial ground at Rome by the side of
Keats' grave, near the pyramid of Cestius. Much as there was to regret in
Shelley's life, there was more in his death, for such genius as his is
rare, and if the work of springtide was so glorious, what might have been
the summer fruitage?

As the Gulf of Spezzia is left behind, the Magra broadens out into an
estuary as it enters the sea, the river which formed in olden days the
boundary between Liguria and Etruria. Five miles from the coast, and less
than half the distance from the river, is Sarzana, the chief city of the
province, once fortified, and still containing a cathedral of some
interest. It once gave birth to a Pope, Nicholas V., the founder of the
Vatican Library, and in the neighborhood the family of the Buonapartes had
their origin, a branch of it having emigrated to Corsica. Sarzana bore
formerly the name of Luna Nova, as it had replaced another Luna which
stood near to the mouth of the river. This was in ruins even in the days
of Lucan, and now the traveller from Saranza to Pisa sees only "a strip of
low, grassy land intervening between him and the sea. Here stood the
ancient city. There is little enough to see. Beyond a few crumbling tombs
and a fragment or two of Roman ruins, nothing remains of Luna. The fairy
scene described by Rutilus, so appropriate to the spot which bore the name
of the virgin-queen of heaven, the 'fair white walls' shaming with their
brightness the untrodden snow, the smooth, many-tinted rocks overrun with
laughing lilies, if not the pure creation of the poet, have now vanished
from the sight. Vestiges of an amphitheater, of a semicircular building
which may be a theater, of a circus, a piscina , and fragments of
columns, pedestals for statues, blocks of pavement and inscriptions, are
all that Luna has now to show."

But all the while the grand group of the Carrara hills is in view,
towering above a lowland region which rolls down towards the coast. A
branch line now leads from Avenza, a small seaport town from which the
marble is shipped, to the town of Carrara, through scenery of singular
beauty. The shelving banks and winding slopes of the foreground hills are
clothed with olives and oaks and other trees; here and there groups of
houses, white and grey and pink, cluster around a campanile tower on some
coign of vantage, while at the back rises the great mountain wall of the
Apuan Alps, with its gleaming crags, scarred, it must be admitted, rather
rudely and crudely by its marble quarries, though the long slopes of
screes beneath these gashes in the more distant views almost resemble the
Alpine snows. The situation of the town is delightful, for it stands at
the entrance of a rapidly narrowing valley, in a sufficiently elevated
position to command a view of this exquisitely rich lowland as it shelves
and rolls down to the gleaming sea. Nor is the place itself devoid of
interest. One of its churches at least, S. Andrea, is a really handsome
specimen of the architecture of this part of Italy in the thirteenth
century, but the quarries dominate, and their products are everywhere.
Here are the studios of sculptors and the ateliers of workmen. The fair
white marble here, like silver in the days of Solomon, is of little
account; it paves the street, builds the houses, serves even for the
basest uses, and is to be seen strewn or piled up everywhere to await
dispersal by the trains to more distant regions. Beyond the streets of
Carrara, in the direction of the mountains, carriage roads no longer
exist. Lanes wind up the hills here and there in rather bewildering
intricacy, among vines and olive groves, to hamlets and quarries; one,
indeed, of rather larger size and more fixity of direction, keeps for a
time near the river, if indeed the stream which flows by Carrara be worthy
of that name, except when the storms are breaking or the snows are melting
upon the mountains. But all these lanes alike terminate in a quarry, are
riven with deep ruts, ploughed up like a field by the wheels of the heavy
wagons that bring down the great blocks of marble. One meets these
grinding and groaning on their way, drawn by yokes of dove-colored oxen
(longer than that with which Elisha was ploughing when the older prophet
cast his mantle upon his shoulders), big, meek-looking beasts, mild-eyed
and melancholy as the lotus-eaters. To meet them is not always an unmixed
pleasure, for the lanes are narrow, and there is often no room to spare;
how the traffic is regulated in some parts is a problem which I have not
yet solved.

Carrara would come near to being an earthly paradise were it not for the
mosquitos, which are said to be such that they would have made even the
Garden of Eden untenable, especially to its first inhabitants. Of them,
however, I cannot speak, for I have never slept in the town, or even
visited it at the season when this curse of the earth is at its worst; but
I have no hesitation in asserting that the mountains of Carrara are not
less beautiful in outline than those of any part of the main chain of the
Alps of like elevation, while they are unequalled in color and variety of
verdure.

To Avenza succeeds Massa, a considerable town, beautifully situated among
olive-clad heights, which are spotted with villas and densely covered with
foliage. Like Carrara, it is close to the mountains, and disputes with
Carrara for the reputation of its quarries. This town was once the capital
of a duchy, Massa-Carrara, and the title was borne by a sister of Napoleon
I. Her large palace still remains; her memory should endure, though not
precisely in honor, for according to Mr. Hare, she pulled down the old
cathedral to improve the view from her windows. But if Massa is beautiful,
so is Pietra Santa, a much smaller town enclosed by old walls and
singularly picturesque in outline. It has a fine old church, with a
picturesque campanile, which, though slightly more modern than the church
itself, has seen more than four centuries. The piazza, with the Town Hall,
this church and another one, is a very characteristic feature. In the
baptistry of one of the churches are some bronzes by Donatello. About half
a dozen miles away, reached by a road which passes through beautiful
scenery, are the marble quarries of Seravezza, which were first opened by
Michael Angelo, and are still in full work. There is only one drawback to
travelling by railway in this region; the train goes too fast. Let it be
as slow as it will, and it can be very slow, we can never succeed in
coming to a decision as to which is the most picturesquely situated place
or the most lovely view. Comparisons notoriously are odious, but
delightful, as undoubtedly is the Riviera di Ponenta to me, the Riviera di
Levante seems even more lovely.

After Pietra Santa, however, the scenery becomes less attractive, the
Apuan Alps begin to be left behind, and a wider strip of plain parts the
Apennines from the sea. This, which is traversed by the railway, is in
itself flat, stale, though perhaps not unprofitable to the husbandman.
Viareggio, mentioned on a previous page, nestles among its woods of oaks
and pines, a place of some little note as a health resort; and then the
railway after emerging from the forest strikes away from the sea, and
crosses the marshy plains of the Serchio, towards the banks of the Arno.

 

It now approaches the grand group of ecclesiastical buildings which rise
above the walls of Pisa. As this town lies well inland, being six miles
from the sea, we must content ourselves with a brief mention. But a long
description is needless, for who does not know of its cathedral and its
Campo Santo, of its baptistry and its leaning tower? There is no more
marvelous or complete group of ecclesiastical buildings in Europe, all
built of the white marble of Carrara, now changed by age into a delicate
cream color, but still almost dazzling in the glory of the mid-day sun,
yet never so beautiful as when walls, arches, and pinnacles are aglow at
its rising, or flushed at its setting. In the cloisters of the Campo Santo
you may see monuments which range over nearly five centuries, and
contrast ancient and modern art; the frescoes on their walls, though often
ill preserved, and not seldom of little merit, possess no small interest
as illustrating medieval notions of a gospel of love and peace. Beneath
their roof at the present time are sheltered a few relics of Roman and
Etruscan days which will repay examination. The very soil also of this
God's acre is not without an interest, for when the Holy Land was lost to
the Christians, fifty-and-three shiploads of earth were brought hither
from Jerusalem that the dead of Pisa might rest in ground which had been
sanctified by the visible presence of their Redeemer. The cathedral is a
grand example of the severe but stately style which was in favor about the
end of the eleventh century, for it was consecrated in the year 1118. It
commemorates a great naval victory won by the Pisans, three years before
the battle of Hastings, and the columns which support the arches of the
interior were at once the spoils of classic buildings and the memorials of
Pisan victories. The famous leaning tower, though later in date,
harmonizes well in general style with the cathedral. Its position, no
doubt, attracts most attention, for to the eye it seems remarkably
insecure, but one cannot help wishing that the settlement had never
occurred, for the slope is sufficient to interfere seriously with the
harmony of the group. The baptistry also harmonizes with the cathedral,
though it was not begun till some forty years after the latter was
completed, and not only was more than a century in building, but also
received some ornamental additions in the fourteenth century. But though
this cathedral group is the glory and the crown of Pisa, the best monument
of its proudest days, there are other buildings of interest in the town
itself; and the broad quays which flank the Arno on each side, the
Lungarno by name, which form a continuous passage from one end of the town
to the other, together with the four bridges which link its older and
newer part, are well worthy of more than a passing notice.

The land bordering the Arno between Pisa and its junction with the
Mediterranean has no charm for the traveller, however it may commend
itself to the farmer. A few miles south of the river's mouth is Leghorn,
and on the eleven miles' journey by rail from it to Pisa the traveller
sees as much, and perhaps more, than he could wish of the delta of the
Arno. It is a vast alluvial plain, always low-lying, in places marshy;
sometimes meadow land, sometimes arable. Here and there are slight and
inconspicuous lines of dunes, very probably the records of old sea margins
as the river slowly encroached upon the Mediterranean, which are covered
sometimes with a grove of pines.

Leghorn is not an old town, and has little attraction for the antiquarian
or the artist. In fact, I think it, for its size, the most uninteresting
town, whether on the sea or inland, that I have entered in Italy. Brindisi
is a dreary hole, but it has one or two objects of interest. Bari is not
very attractive, but it has two churches, the architecture of which will
repay long study; but Leghorn is almost a miracle of commonplace
architecture and of dullness. Of course there is a harbor, of course there
are ships, of course there is the sea, and all these possess a certain
charm; but really this is about as small as it can be under the
circumstances. The town was a creation of the Medici, "the masterpiece of
that dynasty." In the middle of the sixteenth century it was an
insignificant place, with between seven and eight hundred inhabitants.
But it increased rapidly when the princes of that family took the town in
hand and made it a cave of Adullam, whither the discontented or oppressed
from other lands might resort: Jews and Moors from Spain and Portugal,
escaping from persecution; Roman Catholics from England, oppressed by the
retaliatory laws of Elizabeth; merchants from Marseilles, seeking refuge
from civil war. Thus fostered, it was soon thronged by men of talent and
energy; it rapidly grew into an important center of commerce, and now the
town with its suburbs contains nearly a hundred thousand souls.

Leghorn is intersected by canals, sufficiently so to have been sometimes
called a "Little Venice," and has been fortified, but as the defenses
belong to the system of Vauban, they add little to either the interest or
the picturesqueness of the place. Parts of the walls and the citadel
remain, the latter being enclosed by a broad water-ditch. The principal
street has some good shops, and there are two fairly large piazzas; in
one, bearing the name of Carlo Alberto, are statues of heroic size to the
last Grand Duke and to his predecessor. The inscription on the latter is
highly flattering; but that on the former states that the citizens had
come to the conclusion that the continuance of the Austro-Lorenese dynasty
was incompatible with the good order and happiness of Tuscany, and had
accordingly voted union with Italy. The other piazza now bears Victor
Emmanuel's name; in it are a building which formerly was a royal palace,
the town hall, and the cathedral; the last a fair-sized church, but a
rather plain specimen of the Renaissance style, with some handsome columns
of real marble and a large amount of imitation, painted to match. There
are also some remains of the old fortifications, though they are not so
very old, by the side of the inner or original harbor. As this in course
of time proved too shallow for vessels of modern bulk, the Porto Nuovo, or
outer harbor, was begun nearly fifty years since, and is protected from
the waves by a semicircular mole. Among the other lions of the place, and
they are all very small, is a statue of Duke Ferdinand I., one of the
founders of Leghorn, with four Turkish slaves about the pedestal. The
commerce of Leghorn chiefly consists of grain, cotton, wool, and silk, and
is carried on mainly with the eastern ports of the Mediterranean. There is
also an important shipbuilding establishment. It has, however, one link of
interest with English literature, for in the Protestant cemetery was
buried Tobias Smollet. There is a pleasant public walk by the sea margin
outside the town, from where distant views of Elba and other islands are
obtained.

The hilly ground south of the broad valley of the Arno is of little
interest, and for a considerable distance a broad strip of land, a level
plain of cornfields and meadow, intervenes between the sea and the foot of
the hills. Here and there long lines of pine woods seem almost to border
the former; the rounded spurs of the latter are thickly wooded, but are
capped here and there by grey villages, seemingly surrounded by old walls,
and are backed by the bolder outlines of the more distant Apennines. For
many a long mile this kind of scenery will continue, this flat, marshy,
dyke-intersected plain, almost without a dwelling upon it, though village
after village is seen perched like epaulettes on the low shoulders of the
hills. It is easy to understand why they are placed in this apparently
inconvenient position, for we are at the beginning of the Tuscan Maremma,
a district scourged by malaria during the summer months, and none too
healthy, if one may judge by the looks of the peasants, during any time of
the year. But one cannot fail to observe that towards the northern
extremity houses have become fairly common on this plain, and many of them
are new, so that the efforts which have been made to improve the district
by draining seem to have met with success. For some time the seaward views
are very fine; comparatively near to the coast a hilly island rises
steeply from the water and is crowned with a low round tower. Behind this
lies Elba, a long, bold, hilly ridge, and far away, on a clear day, the
great mountain mass of Corsica looms blue in the distance.

Elba has its interests for the geologist, its beauties for the lover of
scenery. It has quarries of granite and serpentine, but its fame rests on
its iron mines, which have been noted from very early times and from which
fine groups of crystals of hematite are still obtained. So famed was it in
the days of the Roman Empire as to call forth from Virgil the well-known
line, "Insula inexhaustis chalybum generosa metallis." When these, its
masters, had long passed away, it belonged in turn to Pisa, to Genoa, to
Lucca, and, after others, to the Grand Duke Cosimo of Florence. Then it
became Neapolitan, and at last French. As everyone knows, it was assigned
to Napoleon after his abdication, and from May, 1814, to February, 1815,
he enjoyed the title of King of Elba. Then, while discontent was deepening
in France, and ambassadors were disputing round the Congress-table at
Vienna, he suddenly gave the slip to the vessels which were watching the
coast and landed in France to march in triumph to Paris, to be defeated at
Waterloo, and to die at St. Helena.

The island is for the most part hilly, indeed almost mountainous, for it
rises at one place nearly three thousand feet above the sea. The valleys
and lower slopes are rich and fertile, producing good fruit and fair wine,
and the views are often of great beauty. The fisheries are of some
importance, especially that of the tunny. Porto Ferrajo, the chief town,
is a picturesquely situated place, on the northern side, which still
retains the forts built by Cosimo I. to defend his newly obtained
territory, and the mansion, a very modest palace, inhabited by Napoleon.

"It must be confessed my isle is very little," was Napoleon's remark when
for the first time he looked around over his kingdom from a mountain
summit above Porto Ferrajo. Little it is in reality, for the island is not
much more than fifteen miles long, and at the widest part ten miles
across; and truly little it must have seemed to the man who had dreamed of
Europe for his empire, and had half realized his vision. Nevertheless, as
one of his historians remarks, "If an empire could be supposed to exist
within such a brief space, Elba possesses so much both of beauty and
variety as might constitute the scene of a summer night's dream of
sovereignty."

At first he professed to be "perfectly resigned to his fate, often spoke
of himself as a man politically dead, and claimed credit for what he said
on public affairs, as having no remaining interest in them." A comment on
himself in connection with Elba is amusing. He had been exploring his new
domain in the company of Sir Niel Campbell, and had visited, as a matter
of course, the iron mines. On being informed that they were valuable, and
brought in a revenue of about twenty thousand pounds per annum, "These
then," he said, "are mine." But being reminded that he had conferred that
revenue on the Legion of Honor, he exclaimed, "Where was my head when I
made such a grant? But I have made many foolish decrees of that sort!"

He set to work at once to explore every corner of the island, and then to
design a number of improvements and alterations on a scale which, had they
been carried into execution with the means which he possessed, would have
perhaps taken his lifetime to execute. The instinct of the conqueror was
by no means dead within him; for "one of his first, and perhaps most
characteristic, proposals was to aggrandize and extend his Lilliputian
dominions by the occupation of an uninhabited island called Pianosa, which
had been left desolate on account of the frequent descents of the
corsairs. He sent thirty of his guards, with ten of the independent
company belonging to the island, upon this expedition (what a contrast to
those which he had formerly directed!), sketched out a plan of
fortification, and remarked with complacency, 'Europe will say that I have
already made a conquest.'"

He was after a short time joined on the island by his mother and his
sister Pauline, and not a few of those who had once fought under his flag
drifted gradually to Elba and took service in his guards. A plot was
organized in France, and when all was ready Napoleon availed himself of
the temporary absence of Sir Neil Campbell and of an English cruiser and
set sail from Elba.

At four in the afternoon of Sunday, the 26th of February, "a signal gun
was fired, the drums beat to arms, the officers tumbled what they could of
their effects into flour-sacks, the men arranged their knapsacks, the
embarkation began, and at eight in the evening they were under weigh." He
had more than one narrow escape on his voyage; for he was hailed by a
French frigate. His soldiers, however, had concealed themselves, and his
captain was acquainted with the commander of the frigate, so no suspicions
were excited. Sir Niel Campbell also, as soon as he found out what had
happened, gave chase in a sloop of war, but only arrived in time to obtain
a distant view of Napoleon's flotilla as its passengers landed.

Pianosa, the island mentioned above, lies to the north of Elba, and gets
its name from its almost level surface; for the highest point is said to
be only eighty feet above the sea. Considering its apparent
insignificance, it figures more than could be expected in history. The
ill-fated son of Marcus Agrippa was banished here by Augustus, at the
instigation of Livia, and after a time was more effectually put out of the
way, in order to secure the succession of her son Tiberius. We read also
that it was afterwards the property of Marcus Piso, who used it as a
preserve for peacocks, which were here as wild as pheasants with us. Some
remnants of Roman baths still keep up the memory of its former masters.
Long afterwards it became a bone of contention between Pisa and Genoa, and
the latter State, on permitting the former to resume possession of these
islands of the Tuscan Archipelago, stipulated that Pianosa should be left
forever uncultivated and deserted. To secure the execution of this
engagement the Genoese stopped up all the wells with huge blocks of rock.

Capraja, a lovely island to the northwest of Elba, is rather nearer to
Corsica than to Italy. Though less than four miles long, and not half this
breadth, it rivals either in hilliness, for its ridges rise in two places
more than fourteen hundred feet above the sea. Saracen, Genoese, Pisan,
and Corsican have caused it in bygone times to lead a rather troubled
existence, and even so late as 1796 Nelson knocked to pieces the fort
which defended its harbor, and occupied the island.

"The 'stagno,' or lagoon, the sea-marsh of Strabo, is a vast expanse of
stagnant salt water, so shallow that it may be forded in parts, yet never
dried up by the hottest summer; the curse of the country around for the
foul and pestilent vapour and the swarms of mosquitoes and other insects
it generates at that season, yet compensating the inhabitants with an
abundance of fish. The fishery is generally carried on at night, and in
the way often practiced in Italy and Sicily, by harpooning the fish, which
are attracted by a light in the prow of the boat. It is a curious sight on
calm nights to see hundreds of these little skiffs or canoes wandering
about with their lights, and making an ever-moving illumination on the
surface of the lake." 

Elba seems to maintain some relation with the mainland by means of the
hilly promontory which supports the houses of Piombino, a small town,
chiefly interesting as being at no great distance from Populonia, an old
Etruscan city of which some considerable ruins still remain. Here, when
the clans gathered to bring back the Tarquins to Rome, stood

 "Sea-girt Populonia,
 Whose sentinels descry
 Sardinia's snowy mountain tops
 Fringing the southern sky."

But long after Lars Porsenna of Clusium had retreated baffled from the
broken bridge Populonia continued to be a place of some importance, for it
has a castle erected in the Middle Ages. But now it is only a poor
village; it retains, however, fragments of building recalling its Roman
masters, and its walls of polygonal masonry carry us back to the era of
the Etruscans.

It must not be forgotten that almost the whole of the coast line described
in this chapter, from the river Magra to Civita Vecchia, belonged to that
mysterious and, not so long since, almost unknown people, the Etruscans.
Indeed, at one time their sway extended for a considerable distance north
and south of these limits. Even now there is much dispute as to their
origin, but they were a powerful and civilized race before Rome was so
much as founded. They strove with it for supremacy in Italy, and were not
finally subdued by that nation until the third century before our era.
"Etruria was of old densely populated, not only in those parts which are
still inhabited, but also, as is proved by remains of cities and
cemeteries, in tracts now desolated by malaria and relapsed into the
desert; and what is now the fen or the jungle, the haunt of the wild boar,
the buffalo, the fox, and the noxious reptile, where man often dreads to
stay his steps, and hurries away from a plague-stricken land, of old
yielded rich harvests of corn, wine and oil, and contained numerous
cities mighty and opulent, into whose laps commerce poured the treasures
of the East and the more precious produce of Hellenic genius. Most of
these ancient sites are now without a habitant, furrowed yearly by the
plough, or forsaken as unprofitable wilderness; and such as are still
occupied are, with few exceptions, mere phantoms of their pristine
greatness, mere villages in the place of populous cities. On every hand
are traces of bygone civilization, inferior in quality, no doubt, to that
which at present exists but much wider in extent and exerting far greater
influence on the neighboring nations and on the destinies of the
world." 

South of this headland the Maremma proper begins. Follonica, the only
place for some distance which can be called a town, is blackened with
smoke to an extent unusual in Italy, for here much of the iron ore from
Elba is smelted. But the views in the neighborhood, notwithstanding the
flatness of the marshy or scrub-covered plain, are not without a charm.
The inland hills are often attractive; to the north lie the headland of
Piombino and sea-girt Elba, to the south the promontory of Castiglione,
which ends in a lower line of bluff capped by a tower, and the irregular
little island of Formica. At Castiglione della Pescaia is a little harbor,
once fortified, which exports wool and charcoal, the products of the
neighboring hills. The promontory of Castiglione must once have been an
island, for it is parted from the inland range by the level plain of the
Maremma. Presently Grosseto, the picturesque capital of the Maremma,
appears, perched on steeply rising ground above the enclosing plain, its
sky-line relieved by a couple of low towers and a dome; it has been
protected with defenses, which date probably from late in the seventeenth
century. Then, after the Omborne has been crossed, one of the rivers,
which issue from the Apennines, the promontory of Talamone comes down to
the sea, protecting the village of the same name. It is a picturesque
little place, overlooked by an old castle, and the anchorage is sheltered
by the island of S. Giglio, quiet enough now, but the guide-book tells us
that here, two hundred and twenty-five years before the Christian era, the
Roman troops disembarked and scattered an invading Gaulish army. But to
the south lies another promontory on a larger scale than Tlamone; this is
the Monte Argentario, the steep slopes of which are a mass of forests. The
views on this part of the coast are exceptionally attractive. Indeed, it
would be difficult to find anything more striking than the situation of
Orbitello. The town lies at the foot of the mountain, for Argentario,
since it rises full two thousand feet above the sea, and is bold in
outline, deserves the name. It is almost separated from the mainland by a
great salt-water lagoon, which is bounded on each side by two low and
narrow strips of land. The best view is from the south, where we look
across a curve of the sea to the town and to Monte Argentario with its
double summit, which, as the border of the lagoon is so low, seems to be
completely insulated.

Orbitello is clearly proved to have been an Etruscan town; perhaps,
according to Mr. Dennis, founded by the Pelasgi, "for the foundations of
the sea-wall which surrounds it on three sides are of vast polygonal
blocks, just such as are seen in many ancient sites of central Italy
(Norba, Segni, PalÃ¦strina, to wit), and such as compose the walls of the
neighboring Cosa." Tombs of Etruscan construction have also been found in
the immediate neighborhood of the city, on the isthmus of sand which
connects it with the mainland. Others also have been found within the
circuit of the walls. The tombs have been unusually productive; in part,
no doubt, because they appear to have escaped earlier plunderers. Vases,
numerous articles in bronze, and gold ornaments of great beauty have been
found. Of the town itself, which from the distance has a very picturesque
aspect, Mr. Dennis says: "It is a place of some size, having nearly six
thousand inhabitants, and among Maremma towns is second only to Grosseto.
It is a proof how much population tends to salubrity in the Maremma that
Orbitello, though in the midst of a stagnant lagoon ten square miles in
extent, is comparatively healthy, and has more than doubled its population
in thirty years, while Telamona and other small places along the coast are
almost deserted in summer, and the few people that remain become bloated
like wine-skins or yellow as lizards." But the inland district is full of
ruins and remnants of towns which in many cases were strongholds long
before Romulus traced out the lines of the walls of Rome with his plough,
if indeed that ever happened. Ansedonia, the ancient Cosa, is a very few
miles away, RusellÃ¦, Saturnia, Sovana at a considerably greater distance;
farther to the south rises another of these forest-clad ridges which,
whether insulated by sea or by fen, are so characteristic of this portion
of the Italian coast. Here the old walls of Corno, another Etruscan town,
may be seen to rise above the olive-trees and the holm-oaks.

Beyond this the lowland becomes more undulating, and the foreground
scenery a little less monotonous. Corneto now appears, crowning a gently
shelving plateau at the end of a spur from the inland hills, which is
guarded at last by a line of cliffs. Enclosed by a ring of old walls, like
Cortona, it "lifts to heaven a diadem of towers." In site and in aspect it
is a typical example of one of the old cities of Etruria. Three hundred
feet and more above the plain which parts it from the sea, with the
gleaming water full in view on one side and the forest-clad ranges on the
other, the outlook is a charming one, and the attractions within its walls
are by no means slight. There are several old churches, and numerous
Etruscan and Roman antiquities are preserved in the municipal museum. The
town itself, however, is not of Etruscan origin, its foundation dates only
from the Middle Ages; but on an opposite and yet more insulated hill the
ruins of Tarquinii, one of the great cities of the Etrurian League, can
still be traced; hardly less important than Veii, one of the most active
cities in the endeavor to restore the dynasty of the Tarquins, it
continued to flourish after it had submitted to Rome, but it declined in
the dark days which followed the fall of the Empire, and never held up its
head after it had been sacked by the Saracens, till at last it was
deserted for Corneto, and met the usual fate of becoming a quarry for the
new town. Only the remnants of buildings and of its defenses are now
visible; but the great necropolis which lies to the southeast of the
Corneto, and on the same spur with it, has yielded numerous antiquities. A
romantic tale of its discovery, so late as 1823, is related in the
guide-books. A native of Corneto in digging accidentally broke into a
tomb. Through the hole he beheld the figure of a warrior extended at
length, accoutred in full armour. For a few minutes he gazed astonished,
then the form of the dead man vanished almost like a ghost, for it
crumbled into dust under the influence of the fresh air. Numerous
subterranean chambers have since been opened; the contents, vases,
bronzes, gems and ornaments, have been removed to museums or scattered
among the cabinets of collectors, but the mural paintings still remain.
They are the works of various periods from the sixth to the second or
third century before the Christian era, and are indicative of the
influence exercised by Greek art on the earlier inhabitants of Italy.

As the headland, crowned by the walls of Corneto, recedes into the
distance a little river is crossed, which, unimportant as it seems, has a
place in ecclesiastical legend, for we are informed that at the Torre
Bertaldo, near its mouth, an angel dispelled St. Augustine's doubts on the
subject of the Trinity. Then the road approaches the largest port on the
coast since Leghorn was left. Civita Vecchia, as the name implies, is an
old town, which, after the decline of Ostia, served for centuries as the
port of Rome. It was founded by Trajan, and sometimes bore his name in
olden time, but there is little or nothing within the walls to indicate so
great an antiquity. It was harried, like so many other places near the
coast, by the Saracens, and for some years was entirely deserted, but
about the middle of the ninth century the inhabitants returned to it, and
the town, which then acquired its present name, by degrees grew into
importance as the temporal power of the Papacy increased. If there is
little to induce the traveller to halt, there is not much more to tempt
the artist. Civita Vecchia occupies a very low and faintly defined
headland. Its houses are whitish in color, square in outline, and rather
flat-topped. There are no conspicuous towers or domes. It was once
enclosed by fortifications, built at various dates about the seventeenth
century. These, however, have been removed on the land side, but still
remain fairly perfect in the neighborhood of the harbor, the entrance to
which is protected by a small island, from which rises a low massive tower
and a high circular pharos. There is neither animation nor commerce left
in the place; what little there was disappeared when the railway was
opened. It is living up to its name, and its old age cannot be called
vigorous.

South of Civita Vecchia the coast region, though often monotonous enough,
becomes for a time slightly more diversified. There is still some marshy
ground, still some level plain, but the low and gently rolling hills which
border the main mass of the Apennines extend at times down to the sea, and
even diversify its coast-line, broken by a low headland. This now and
again, as at Santa Marinella, is crowned by an old castle. All around much
evergreen scrub is seen, here growing in tufts among tracts of coarse
herbage, there expanding into actual thickets of considerable extent, and
the views sometimes become more varied, and even pretty. Santa Severa, a
large castle built of grey stone, with its keep-like group of higher
towers on its low crag overlooking the sea, reminds us of some old
fortress on the Fifeshire coast. Near this headland, so antiquarians say,
was Pyrgos, once the port of the Etruscan town of CÃ¦re, which lies away
among the hills at a distance of some half-dozen miles. Here and there
also a lonely old tower may be noticed along this part of the coast. These
recall to mind in their situation, though they are more picturesque in
their aspect, the Martello Towers on the southern coast of England. Like
them, they are a memorial of troublous times, when the invader was
dreaded. They were erected to protect the Tuscan coast from the descents
of the Moors, who for centuries were the dread of the Mediterranean.
Again and again these corsairs swooped down; now a small flotilla would
attack some weakly defended town; now a single ship would land its
boatload of pirates on some unguarded beach to plunder a neighboring
village or a few scattered farms, and would retreat from the raid with a
little spoil and a small band of captives, doomed to slavery, leaving
behind smoking ruins and bleeding corpses. It is strange to think how long
it was before perfect immunity was secured from these curses of the
Mediterranean. England, whatever her enemies may say, has done a few good
deeds in her time, and one of the best was when her fleet, under the
command of Admiral Pellew, shattered the forts of Algiers and burnt every
vessel of the pirate fleet.

The scenery for a time continues to improve. The oak woods become higher,
the inland hills are more varied in outline and are forest-clad. Here
peeps out a crag, there a village or a castle. At Palo a large,
unattractive villa and a picturesque old castle overlook a fine line of
sea-beach, where the less wealthy classes in Rome come down for a breath
of fresh air in the hot days of summer. It also marks the site of Alsium,
where, in Roman times, one or two personages of note, of whom Pompey was
the most important, had country residences. For a time there is no more
level plain; the land everywhere shelves gently to the sea, covered with
wood or with coarse herbage. But before long there is another change, and
the great plain of the Tiber opens out before our eyes, extending on one
hand to the not distant sea, on the other to the hills of Rome. It is
flat, dreary, and unattractive, at any rate in the winter season, as is
the valley of the Nen below Peterborough, or of the Witham beyond the
Lincolnshire wolds. It is cut up by dykes, which are bordered by low
banks. Here and there herds of mouse-colored oxen with long horns are
feeding, and hay-ricks, round with low conical tops, are features more
conspicuous than cottages. The Tiber winds on its serpentine course
through this fenland plain, a muddy stream, which it was complimentary for
the Romans to designate flavus , unless that word meant a color anything
but attractive. One low tower in the distance marks the site of Porto,
another that of Ostia and near the latter a long grove of pines is a
welcome variation to the monotony of the landscape.

These two towns have had their day of greatness. The former, as its name
implies, was once the port of Rome, and in the early days of Christianity
was a place of note. It was founded by Trajan, in the neighborhood of a
harbor constructed by Claudius; for this, like that of Ostia, which it was
designed to replace, was already becoming choked up. But though emperors
may propose, a river disposes, especially when its mud is in question. The
port of Trajan has long since met with the same fate; it is now only a
shallow basin two miles from the sea. Of late years considerable
excavations have been made at Porto on the estate of Prince Tortonia, to
whom the whole site belongs. The port constructed by Trajan was hexagonal
in form; it was surrounded by warehouses and communicated with the sea by
a canal. Between it and the outer or Claudian port a palace was built for
the emperor, and the remains of the wall erected by Constantine to protect
the harbor on the side of the land can still be seen. The only mediÃ¦val
antiquities which Porto contains are the old castle, which serves as the
episcopal palace, and the flower of the church of Santa Rufina, which is
at least as old as the tenth century.

Ostia, which is a place of much greater antiquity than Porto, is not so
deserted, though its star declined as that of the other rose. Founded, as
some say, by Ancus Martius, it was the port of Rome until the first
century of the present era. Then the silting up of its communication with
the sea caused the transference of the commerce to Porto, but "the fame of
the temple of Castor and Pollux, the numerous villas of the Roman
patricians abundantly scattered along the coast, and the crowds of people
who frequented its shores for the benefit of sea bathing, sustained the
prosperity of the city for some time after the destruction of its harbor."
But at last it went down hill, and then invaders came. Once it had
contained eighty thousand inhabitants; in the days of the Medici it was a
poor village, and the people eked out their miserable existences by making
lime of the marbles of the ruined temples! So here the vandalism of
peasants, even more than of patricians, has swept away many a choice relic
of classic days. Villas and temples alike have been destroyed; the sea is
now at a distance; Ostia is but a small village, "one of the most
picturesque though melancholy sites near Rome," but during the greater
part of the present century careful excavations have been made, many
valuable art treasures have been unearthed, and a considerable portion of
the ancient city has been laid bare. Shops and dwellings, temples and
baths, the theater and the forum, with many a remnant of the ancient town,
can now be examined, and numerous antiquities of smaller size are
preserved in the museum at the old castle. This, with its strong bastions,
its lofty circular tower and huge machicolations, is a very striking
object as it rises above the plain "massive and gray against the
sky-line." It has been drawn by artists not a few, from Raffaelle, who saw
it when it had not very long been completed, down to the present time.




X

VENICE

So long as Venice is unvisited a new sensation is among the possibilities
of life. There is no town like it in Europe. Amsterdam has its canals, but
Venice is all canals; Genoa has its palaces, but in Venice they are more
numerous and more beautiful. Its situation is unique, on a group of
islands in the calm lagoon. But the Venice of to-day is not the Venice of
thirty years ago. Even then a little of the old romance had gone, for a
long railway viaduct had linked it to the mainland. In earlier days it
could be reached only by a boat, for a couple of miles of salt water lay
between the city and the marshy border of the Paduan delta. Now Venice is
still more changed, and for the worse. The people seem more
poverty-stricken and pauperized. Its buildings generally, especially the
ordinary houses, look more dingy and dilapidated. The paint seems more
chipped, the plaster more peeled, the brickwork more rotten; everything
seems to tell of decadence, commercial and moral, rather than of
regeneration. In the case of the more important structures, indeed, the
effects of time have often been more than repaired. Here a restoration,
not seldom needless and ill-judged, has marred some venerable relic of
olden days with crude patches of color, due to modern reproductions of the
ancient and original work: the building has suffered, as it must be
admitted not a few of our own most precious heirlooms have suffered, from
the results of zeal untempered by discretion, and the destroyer has worked
his will under the guise of the restorer.

The mosquito flourishes still in Venice as it did of yore. It would be too
much to expect that the winged representative of the genus should thrive
less in Italian freedom than under Austrian bondage, but something might
have been done to extirpate the two-legged species. He is present in force
in most towns south of the Alps, but he is nowhere so abundant or so
exasperating as in Venice. If there is one place in one town in Europe
where the visitor might fairly desire to possess his soul in peace and to
gaze in thoughtful wonder, it is in the great piazza, in front of the
faÃ§ade, strange and beautiful as a dream, of the duomo of St. Mark. Halt
there and try to feast on its marvels, to worship in silence and in peace.
Vain illusion. There is no crowd of hurrying vehicles or throng of
hurrying men to interfere of necessity with your visions (there are often
more pigeons than people in the piazza), but up crawls a beggar, in
garments vermin-haunted, whining for "charity"; down swoop would-be
guides, volunteering useless suggestions in broken and barely intelligible
English; from this side and from that throng vendors of rubbish,
shell-ornaments, lace, paltry trinkets, and long ribands of photographic
"souvenirs," appalling in their ugliness. He who can stand five minutes
before San Marco and retain a catholic love of mankind must indeed be
blessed with a temper of much more than average amiability.

The death of Rome was indirectly the birth of Venice. Here in the great
days of the Empire there was not, so far as we know, even a village.
Invaders came, the Adriatic littoral was wrecked; its salvage is to be
found among the islands of the lagoons. Aquileia went up in flames, the
cities of the Paduan delta trembled before the hordes of savage Huns, but
the islands of its coast held out a hope of safety. What in those days
these camps of refuge must have been can be inferred from the islands
which now border the mainland, low, marshy, overgrown by thickets, and
fringed by reeds; they were unhealthy, but only accessible by intricate
and difficult channels, and with little to tempt the spoiler. It was
better to risk fever in the lagoons than to be murdered or driven off into
slavery on the mainland. It was some time before Venice took the lead
among these scattered settlements. It became the center of government in
the year 810, but it was well-nigh two centuries before the Venetian State
attained to any real eminence. Towards this, the first and perhaps the
most important step was crushing the Istrian and Dalmatian pirates. This
enabled the Republic to become a great "Adriatic and Oriental Company,"
and to get into their hands the carrying trade to the East. The men of
Venice were both brave and shrewd, something like our Elizabethan
forefathers, mighty on sea and land, but men of understanding also in the
arts of peace. She did battle with Genoa for commercial supremacy, with
the Turk for existence. She was too strong for the former, but the latter
at last wore her out, and Lepanto was one of her latest and least fruitful
triumphs. Still, it was not till the end of the sixteenth century that a
watchful eye could detect the symptoms of senile decay. Then Venice
tottered gradually to its grave. Its slow disintegration occupied more
than a century and a half; but the French Revolution indirectly caused the
collapse of Venice, for its last doge abdicated, and the city was occupied
by Napoleon in 1797. After his downfall Venetia was handed over to
Austria, and found in the Hapsburg a harsh and unsympathetic master. It
made a vain struggle for freedom in 1848, but was at last ceded to Italy
after the Austro-Prussian war in 1866.

The city is built upon a group of islands; its houses are founded on
piles, for there is no really solid ground. How far the present canals
correspond with the original channels between small islands, how far they
are artificial, it is difficult to say; but whether the original islets
were few or many, there can be no doubt that they were formerly divided by
the largest, or the Grand Canal, the Rio Alto or Deep Stream. This takes
an S-like course, and parts the city roughly into two halves. The side
canals, which are very numerous, for the town is said to occupy one
hundred and fourteen islands, are seldom wider, often rather narrower than
a by-street in the City of London. In Venice, as has often been remarked,
not a cart or a carriage, not even a coster's donkey-cart, can be used.
Streets enough there are, but they are narrow and twisting, very like the
courts in the heart of London. The carriage, the cab, and the omnibus are
replaced by the gondolas. These it is needless to describe, for who does
not know them? One consequence of this substitution of canals for streets
is that the youthful Venetian takes to the water like a young duck to a
pond, and does not stand much on ceremony, in the matter of taking off
his clothes. Turn into a side canal on a summer's day, and one may see the
younger members of a family all bathing from their own doorstep, the
smallest one, perhaps, to prevent accidents, being tied by a cord to a
convenient ring; nay, sometimes as we are wandering through one of the
narrow calle (alleys) we hear a soft patter of feet, something damp
brushes past, and a little Venetian lad, lithe and black-eyed,
bare-legged, bare-backed, and all but bare-breeched, shoots past as he
makes a short cut to his clothes across a block of buildings, round which
he cannot yet manage to swim.

In such a city as Venice it is hard to praise one view above another.
There is the noble sweep of the Grand Canal, with its palaces; there are
many groups of buildings on a less imposing scale, but yet more
picturesque, on the smaller canals, often almost every turn brings some
fresh surprise; but there are two views which always rise up in my mind
before all others whenever my thoughts turn to Venice, more especially as
it used to be. One is the view of the faÃ§ade of San Marco from the Piazza.
I shall make no apology for quoting words which describe more perfectly
than my powers permit the impressions awakened by this dream-like
architectural conception. "Beyond those troops of ordered arches there
rises a vision out of the earth, and all the great square seems to have
opened from it in a kind of awe, that we may see it far away: a multitude
of pillars and white domes clustered into a long, low pyramid of colored
light, a treasure-heap, as it seems, partly of gold and partly of opal and
mother-of-pearl, hollowed beneath into five great vaulted porches, ceiled
with fair mosaic and beset with sculptures of alabaster, clear as amber
and delicate as ivory; sculpture fantastic and involved, of palm-leaves
and lilies, and grapes and pomegranates, and birds clinging and fluttering
among the branches, all twined together into an endless network of buds
and plumes, and, in the midst of it, the solemn forms of angels, sceptered
and robed to the feet, and leaning to each other across the gates, their
features indistinct among the gleaming of the golden ground through the
leaves beside them, interrupted and dim, like the morning light as it
faded back among the branches of Eden when first its gates were
angel-guarded long ago. And round the walls of the porches there are set
pillars of variegated stones, jasper and porphyry, and deep-green
serpentine, spotted with flakes of snow, and marbles that half refuse and
half yield to the sunshine, Cleopatra-like, 'their bluest veins to kiss,'
the shadow as it steals back from them revealing line after line of azure
undulation, as a receding tide leaves the waved sand: their capitals rich
with interwoven tracery, rooted knots of herbage, and drifting leaves of
acanthus and vine, and mystical signs all beginning and ending in the
Cross: and above them in the broad archivolts a continuous chain of
language and of life, angels and the signs of heaven and the labors of
men, each in its appointed season upon the earth; and above them another
range of glittering pinnacles, mixed with white arches edged with scarlet
flowers, a confusion of delight, among which the breasts of the Greek
horses are seen blazing in their breadth of golden strength, and the St.
Mark's lion, lifted on a blue field covered with stars, until at last, as
if in ecstasy, the crests of the arches break into a marble foam, and toss
themselves far into the blue sky in flashes and wreaths of sculptured
spray, as if the breakers on the Lido shore had been frost-bound before
they fell, and the sea-nymphs had inlaid them with coral and amethyst." 

This is San Marco as it was. Eight centuries had harmed it little; they
had but touched the building with a gentle hand and had mellowed its tints
into tender harmony; now its new masters, cruel in their kindness, have
restored the mosaics and scraped the marbles; now raw blotches and patches
of crude color glare out in violent contrast with those parts which, owing
to the intricacy of the carved work, or some other reason, it has been
found impossible to touch. To look at St. Mark's now is like listening to
some symphony by a master of harmony which is played on instruments all
out of tune.

Photographs, pictures, illustrations of all kinds, have made St. Mark's so
familiar to all the world that it is needless to attempt to give any
description of its details.

It may suffice to say that the cathedral stands on the site of a smaller
and older building, in which the relics of St. Mark, the tutelary saint of
Venice, had been already enshrined. The present structure was begun about
the year 976, and occupied very nearly a century in building. But it is
adorned with the spoils of many a classic structure: with columns and
slabs of marble and of porphyry and of serpentine, which were hewn from
quarries in Greece and Syria, in Egypt and Libya, by the hands of Roman
slaves, and decked the palaces and the baths, the temples and the theaters
of Roman cities.

The inside of St. Mark's is not less strange and impressive, but hardly so
attractive as the exterior. It is plain in outline and almost heavy in
design, a Greek cross in plan, with a vaulted dome above the center and
each arm. Much as the exterior of St. Mark's owes to marble, porphyry,
and mosaic, it would be beautiful if constructed only of grey limestone.
This could hardly be said of the interior: take away the choice stones
from columns and dado and pavement, strip away the crust of mosaic, those
richly robed figures on ground of gold, from wall and from vault (for the
whole interior is veneered with marbles or mosaics), and only a rather
dark, massive building would remain, which would seem rather lower and
rather smaller than one had been led to expect.

The other view in Venice which seems to combine best its peculiar
character with its picturesque beauty may be obtained at a very short
distance from St. Mark's. Leave the faÃ§ade of which we have just spoken,
the three great masts, with their richly ornamented sockets of bronze,
from which, in the proud days of Venice, floated the banners of Candia,
Cyprus, and the Morea; turn from the Piazza into the Piazzetta; leave on
the one hand the huge Campanile, more huge than beautiful (if one may
venture to whisper a criticism), on the other the sumptuous portico of the
Ducal Palace; pass on beneath the imposing faÃ§ade of the palace itself,
with its grand colonnade; on between the famous columns, brought more than
seven centuries since from some Syrian ruins, which bear the lion of St.
Mark and the statue of St. Theodore, the other patron of the Republic; and
then, standing on the Molo at the head of the Riva degli Schiavoni, look
around; or better still, step down into one of the gondolas which are in
waiting at the steps, and push off a few dozen yards from the land: then
look back on the faÃ§ade of the Palace and the Bridge of Sighs, along the
busy quays of the Riva, towards the green trees of the Giardini Publici,
look up the Piazzetta, between the twin columns, to the glimpses of St.
Mark's and the towering height of the Campanile, along the faÃ§ade of the
Royal Palace, with the fringe of shrubbery below contrasting pleasantly
with all these masses of masonry, up the broad entrance to the Grand
Canal, between its rows of palaces, across it to the great dome of Santa
Maria della Salute and the Dogana della Mare, with its statue of Fortune
(appropriate to the past rather than to the present) gazing out from its
seaward angle. Beyond this, yet farther away, lies the Isola San Giorgio,
a group of plain buildings only, a church, with a dome simple in outline
and a brick campanile almost without adornment, yet the one thing in
Venice, after the great group of St. Mark; this is a silent witness to its
triumphs in presses itself on the mind. From this point of view Venice
rises before our eyes in its grandeur and in its simplicity, in its
patrician and its plebeian aspects, as "a sea Cybele, fresh from ocean,
throned on her hundred isles ... a ruler of the waters and their powers."

 

But to leave Venice without a visit to the Grand Canal would be to leave
the city with half the tale untold. Its great historic memories are
gathered around the Piazza of St. Mark; this is a silent witness to its
triumphs in peace and in war, to the deeds noble and brave, of its rulers.
But the Grand Canal is the center of its life, commercial and domestic; it
leads from its quays to its Exchange, from the Riva degli Schiavoni and
the Dogana della Mare to the Rialto. It is bordered by the palaces of the
great historic families who were the rulers and princes of Venice, who
made the State by their bravery and prudence, who destroyed it by their
jealousies and self-seeking. The Grand Canal is a genealogy of Venice,
illustrated and engraved on stone. As one glides along in a gondola,
century after century in the history of domestic architecture, from the
twelfth to the eighteenth, slowly unrolls itself before us. There are
palaces which still remain much as they were of old, but here and there
some modern structure, tasteless and ugly, has elbowed for itself a place
among them; not a few, also, have been converted into places of business,
and are emblazoned with prominent placards proclaiming the trade of their
new masters, worthy representatives of an age that is not ashamed to daub
the cliffs of the St. Gothard with the advertisements of hotels and to
paint its boulders for the benefit of vendors of chocolate!

But in the present era one must be thankful for anything that is spared by
the greed of wealth and the vulgarity of a "democracy." Much of old Venice
still remains, though little steamers splutter up and down the Grand
Canal, and ugly iron bridges span its waters, both, it must be admitted,
convenient, though hideous; still the gondolas survive; still one hears at
every corner the boatman's strange cry of warning, sometimes the only
sound except the knock of the oar that breaks the silence of the liquid
street. Every turn reveals something quaint and old-world. Now it is a
market-boat, with its wicker panniers hanging outside, loaded with fish or
piled with vegetables from one of the more distant islets; now some little
bridge, now some choice architectural fragment, a doorway, a turret, an
oriel, or a row of richly ornate windows, now a tiny piazzetta leading up
to the faÃ§ade and campanile of a more than half-hidden church; now the
marble enclosure of a well. Still the water-carriers go about with buckets
of hammered copper hung at each end of a curved pole; still, though more
rarely, some quaint costume may be seen in the calle ; still the dark
shops in the narrow passages are full of goods strange to the eye, and
bright in their season with the flowers and fruits of an Italian summer;
still the purple pigeons gather in scores at the wonted hour to be fed on
the Piazza of St. Mark, and, fearless of danger, convert the distributor
of a pennyworth of maize into a walking dovecot.

Still Venice is delightful to the eyes (unhappily not always so to the
nose in many a nook and corner) notwithstanding the pressure of poverty
and the wantonness of restorers. Perchance it may revive and yet see
better days (its commerce is said to have increased since 1866); but if
so, unless a change comes over the spirit of the age, the result will be
the more complete destruction of all that made its charm and its wonder;
so this chapter may appropriately be closed by a brief sketch of one scene
which seems in harmony with the memories of its departed greatness, a
Venetian funeral. The dead no longer rest among the living beneath the
pavement of the churches: the gondola takes the Venetian "about the
streets" to the daily business of life; it bears him away from his home to
the island cemetery. From some narrow alley, muffled by the enclosing
masonry, comes the sound of a funeral march; a procession emerges on to
the piazzetta by the water-side; the coffin is carried by long-veiled
acolytes and mourners with lighted torches, accompanied by a brass band
with clanging cymbals. A large gondola, ornamented with black and silver,
is in waiting at the nearest landing place; the band and most of the
attendants halt by the water-side; the coffin is placed in the boat, the
torches are extinguished; a wilder wail of melancholy music, a more
resonant clang of the cymbals, sounds the last farewell to home and its
pleasures and its work; the oars are dipped in the water, and another
child of Venice is taken from the city of the living to the city of the
dead.

A long line of islands completely shelters Venice from the sea, so that
the waters around its walls are very seldom ruffled into waves. The tide
also rises and falls but little, not more than two or three feet, if so
much. Thus no banks of pestiferous mud are laid bare at low water by the
ebb and flow, and yet some slight circulation is maintained in the canals,
which, were it not for this, would be as intolerable as cesspools. Small
boats can find their way over most parts of the lagoon, where in many
places a safe route has to be marked out with stakes, but for large
vessels the channels are few. A long island, Malamocco by name, intervenes
between Venice and the Adriatic, on each side of which are the chief if
not the only entrances for large ships. At its northern end is the sandy
beach of the Lido, a great resort of the Venetians, for there is good
sea-bathing. But except this, Malamocco has little to offer; there is more
interest in other parts of the lagoon. At the southern end, some fifteen
miles away, the old town of Chioggia is a favorite excursion. On the sea
side the long fringe of narrow islands, of which Malamocco is one,
protected by massive walls, forms a barrier against the waves of the
Adriatic. On the land side is the dreary fever-haunted region of the
 Laguna Morta , like a vast fen, beyond which rise the serrate peaks of
the Alps and the broken summits of the Euganean Hills. The town itself,
the Roman Fossa Claudia, is a smaller edition of Venice, joined like it to
the mainland by a bridge. If it has fewer relics of architectural value it
has suffered less from modern changes, and has retained much more of its
old-world character.

Murano, an island or group of islands, is a tiny edition of Venice, and a
much shorter excursion, for it lies only about a mile and a half away to
the north of the city. Here is the principal seat of the workers in glass;
here are made those exquisite reproductions of old Venetian glass and of
ancient mosaic which have made the name of Salviati noted in all parts of
Europe. Here, too, is a cathedral which, though it has suffered from time,
neglect and restoration, is still a grand relic. At the eastern end there
is a beautiful apse enriched by an arcade and decorated with inlaid
marbles, but the rest of the exterior is plain. As usual in this part of
Italy (for the external splendor of St. Mark's is exceptional) all
richness of decoration is reserved for the interior. Here columns of
choice stones support the arches; there is a fine mosaic in the eastern
apse, but the glory of Murano is its floor, a superb piece of opus
Alexandrinum , inlaid work of marbles and porphyries, bearing date early
in the eleventh century, and richer in design than even that at St.
Mark's, for peacocks and other birds, with tracery of strange design, are
introduced into its patterns.

But there is another island beyond Murano, some half-dozen miles away from
Venice, which must not be left unvisited. It is reached by a delightful
excursion over the lagoon, among lonely islands thinly inhabited, the
garden grounds of Venice, where they are not left to run wild with rank
herbage or are covered by trees. This is Torcello, the ancient Altinum.
Here was once a town of note, the center of the district when Venice was
struggling into existence. Its houses now are few and ruinous; the ground
is half overgrown with populars and acacias and pomegranates, red in
summer-time with scarlet flowers. But it possesses two churches which,
though small in size are almost unique in their interest, the duomo,
dedicated to St. Mary, and the church of Sta. Fosca. They stand side by
side, and are linked together by a small cloister. The former is a plain
basilica which retains its ancient plan and arrangement almost intact. At
one end is an octagonal baptistry, which, instead of being separated from
the cathedral by an atrium or court, is only divided from it by a
passage. The exterior of the cathedral is plain; the interior is not much
more ornate. Ancient columns, with quaintly carved capitals supporting
stilted semicircular arches, divide the aisles from the nave. Each of
these has an apsidal termination. The high altar stands in the center of
the middle one, and behind it, against the wall, the marble throne of the
bishop is set up on high, and is approached by a long flight of marble
steps. On each side, filling up the remainder of the curve, six rows of
steps rise up like the seats of an amphitheater, the places of the
attendant priests. The chancel, true to its name, is formed by enclosing a
part of the nave with a low stone wall and railing. Opinions differ as to
the date of this cathedral. According to Fergusson it was erected early in
the eleventh century, but it stands on the site of one quite four
centuries older, and reproduces the arrangement of its predecessor if it
does not actually incorporate portions of it. Certainly the columns and
capitals in the nave belong, as a rule, to an earlier building. Indeed,
they have probably done duty more than once, and at least some of them
were sculptured before the name of Attila had been heard of in the delta
of the North Italian rivers.

The adjoining church of Sta. Fosca is hardly less interesting. An
octagonal case, with apses at the eastern end, supports a circular drum,
which is covered by a low conical roof, and a cloister or corridor
surrounds the greater part of the church. This adds much to the beauty of
the design, the idea, as Fergusson remarks, being evidently borrowed from
the circular colonnades of the Roman temples. He also justly praises the
beauty of the interior. In this church also, which in its present
condition is not so old as the cathedral, the materials of a much older
building or buildings have been employed. But over these details or the
mosaics in the cathedral we must not linger, and must only pause to
mention the curious stone chair in the adjacent court which bears the name
of the throne of Attila; perhaps, like the chair of the Dukes of
Corinthia, it was the ancient seat of the chief magistrate of the island.


XIII

SICILY
To the traveller who proposes to enter Sicily by the favorite sea-route
from Naples to Messina the approach to the island presents a scene of
singular interest and beauty. A night's voyage from the sunny bay which
sleeps at the foot of Vesuvius suffices to bring him almost within the
shadow of Etna. By daybreak he has just passed the Punta del Faro, the
lighthoused promontory at the extreme northeastern angle of this
three-cornered isle, the Trinacria of the ancients, and is steaming into
the Straits. Far to his left he can see, with the eye of faith at any
rate, the rock of Scylla jutting out from the Calabrian coast, while the
whirlpool of Charybdis, he will do well to believe, is eddying and foaming
at the foot of the Pharos a few hundred yards to his right. Here let him
resolutely locate the fabled monster of the gaping jaws into which were
swept those luckless mariners of old whose dread of Scylla drove them too
near to the Sicilian shore. Modern geographers may maintain (as what will
they not maintain?) that Charybdis should be identified with the
Garofalo, the current which sweeps round the breakwater of Messina seven
miles to the south; but Circe distinctly told Ulysses that the two
monsters were not a "bowshot apart"; and the perfectly clear and
straightforward account given of the matter by Ã†neas to Dido renders it
impossible to doubt that Scylla and Charybdis faced each other at the
mouth of the Straits. The traveller will be amply justified in believing
that he has successfully negotiated the passage between these two terrors
as soon as he has left the Pharos behind him and is speeding along the
eastern coast of the island towards the city of Messina.

Very bold and impressive grows the island scenery under the gradually
broadening daylight. Tier on tier above him rise the bare, brown
hill-slopes, spurs of the great mountain pyramid which he is approaching.
These tumbled masses of the mountains, deepening here where the night
shadow still lingers into downright black, and reddening there where they
"take the morning" to the color of rusty iron, proclaim their volcanic
character, to all who are familiar with the signs thereof, unmistakably
enough. Just such a ferruginous face does Nature turn towards you as you
drop down at twilight past the Isleta of Las Palmas, in Gran Canaria, or
work your way from the eastern to the western coast of Teneriffe, round
the spreading skirts of the Peak. Rock scenery of another character is
visible on the left, among the Calabrian mountains, dwarfed somewhat by
the nearer as well as loftier heights of the island opposite, but bearing
no mean part in the composition of the land- and sea-scape, nevertheless.
Mile after mile the view maintains its rugged beauty, and when at last the
town and harbor of Messina rise in sight, and the fort of Castellaccio
begins to fill the eye, to the exclusion of the natural ramparts of the
hills, the traveller will be fain to admit that few islands in the world
are approached through scenery so romantic and so well attuned to its
historic associations.

There are those who find Messina disappointing, and there is no doubt that
to quit the waters of a rock-embosomed strait for the harbor of a large
commercial seaport possessing no special claim to beauty of situation, is
to experience a certain effect of disenchantment. It would not be fair,
however, to hold the town, as a town, responsible for this. It is only
some such jewel as Naples or as Algiers that could vie with such a
setting. Messina is not an Algiers or a Naples; it is only an honest,
ancient, prosperous, active, fairly clean, and architecturally
unimpressive town. The chief commercial center of Sicily, with upwards of
eighty thousand inhabitants, a Cathedral, an Archbishop, and a University,
it can afford, its inhabitants perhaps believe, to dispense with Ã¦sthetic
attractions. But its spacious quays, its fine and curiously shaped port,
the Harbor of the Sickle as it was called by the ancients when after it
they named the city "Zancle," have an interest of their own if they are
without much claim to the picturesque; and the view from the Faro Grande
on the curve of the Sickle, with the Sicilian mountains behind, the
Calabrian rocks in front, and the Straits to the right and left of the
spectator, is not to be despised.

Still, Messina is not likely to detain any pleasure-tourist long,
especially with Taormina, the gem of the island, and one might almost say,
indeed, of all Italy, awaiting him at only the distance of a railway
journey of some sixty to a hundred miles. The line from Messina to
Giardini, the station for Taormina, and the spot whence Garibaldi crossed
to Calabria in the autumn of 1860, skirts the sea-coast, burrowing under
headlands and spanning dry river-beds for a distance of thirty miles, amid
the scenery which has been already viewed from the Straits, but which
loses now from its too close neighborhood to the eye. The rock-built town
of ancient Taormina is perched upon a steep and craggy bluff some four
hundred feet above the railway line, and is approached by an extremely
circuitous road of about three miles in length. Short cuts there are for
the youthful, the impetuous, and the sound in wind; but even these
fortunate persons might do worse than save their breath and restrain their
impatience to reach their destination, if only for the sake of the varying
panorama which unfolds itself as they ascend from level to level on their
winding way. There can be no denying that Taormina stands nobly and
confronts the Straits with a simple dignity that many greater and even
higher cities might well envy. To see it from a favoring angle of the
battlemented road, with the southern sunlight bathing its bright white
walls and broken lines of housetops, with the tower of Sant' Agostino
traced against the cone of Etna, and the wall that skirts it almost
trembling on the utmost verge of the cliff, while at the foot of the
declivity the Straits trend southward in "tender, curving lines of creamy
spray," to see this is at least to admit that some short cuts are not
worth taking, and that the bridle-path up the hillside might well be left
to those animals for whose use it was constructed, and who are generally
believed to prefer an abridgment of their journey to any conceivable
enhancement of its picturesque attractions.

 

At Taormina one may linger long. The pure, inspiriting air of its lofty
plateau, and the unequaled beauty of the prospect which it commands, would
alone be sufficient to stay the hurried footsteps of even the most
time-pressed of "globe-trotters"; but those who combine a love of scenery
with a taste for archÃ¦ology and the classical antique will find it indeed
a difficult place to leave. For, a little way above the town, and in the
center of an exquisite landscape stand the magnificent ruins of the Greek
Theater, its auditorium, it is true, almost leveled with the plain, but
more perfect as to the remains of its stage and proscenium than any other
in Sicily, and, with one exception, in the world. But there is no need to
be a scholar or an antiquarian to feel the extraordinary fascination of
the spot. Nowhere among all the relics of bygone civilizations have Time
and Nature dealt more piously with the work of man. Every spring and
summer that have passed over those mouldering columns and shattered arches
have left behind them their tribute of clasping creeper and clambering
wild flower and softly draping moss. Boulder and plinth in common, the
masonry alike of Nature and of man, have mellowed into the same exquisite
harmony of greys and greens; and the eye seeks in vain to distinguish
between the handiwork of the Great Mother and those monuments of her
long-dead children which she has clothed with an immortality of her own.

Apart, however, from the indescribable charm of its immediate
surroundings, the plateau of the theater must fix itself in the memory of
all who have entered Sicily by way of Messina as having afforded them
their first "clear" view of Etna, their first opportunity, that is to say,
of looking at the majestic mountain unintercepted at any point of its
outline or mass by objects on a lower level. The whole panorama indeed
from this point is magnificent. To the left, in the foreground, rise the
heights of Castiglione from the valley of the Alcantara; while, as the eye
moves round the prospect from left to right, it lights in succession on
the hermitage of S. Maria della Rocca, the Castle of Taormina, the
overhanding hill of Mola, and Monte Venere towering above it. But,
dominating the whole landscape, and irresistibly recalling to itself the
gaze which wanders for a moment to the nearer chain of mountains or the
blue Calabrian hills across the Strait, arises the never-to-be-forgotten
pyramid of Etna, a mountain unrivaled in its combination of majesty and
grace, in the soft symmetry of its "line," and the stern contrast between
its lava-scarred sides, with their associations of throe and torture, and
the eternal peace of its snow-crowned head. It will be seen at a closer
view from Catania, and, best of all, on the journey from that place to
Syracuse; but the first good sight of it from Taormina, at any rate when
weather and season have been favorable, is pretty sure to become an
abiding memory.

Twenty miles farther southwards along the coast lie the town and baths of
Aci Reale, a pleasant resort in the "cure" season, but to others than
invalids more interesting in its associations with Theocritus and Ovid,
with "Homer the Handel of Epos, and Handel the Homer of song;" in a word,
with Acis and Galatea, and Polyphemus, and the much-enduring Ulysses. Aci
Castello, a couple of miles or so down the coast, is, to be precise, the
exact spot which is associated with these very old-world histories, though
Polyphemus's sheep-run probably extended far along the coast in both
directions, and the legend of the giant's defeat and discomfiture by the
hero of the Odyssey is preserved in the nomenclature of the rocky chain
which juts out at this point from the Sicilian shore. The Scogli dei
Ciclopi are a fine group of basaltic rocks, the biggest of them some two
hundred feet in height and two thousand feet in circumference, no doubt
"the stone far greater than the first" with which Polyphemus took his shot
at the retreating Wanderer, and which "all but struck the end of the
rudder." It is a capital "half-brick" for a giant to "heave" at a
stranger, whether the Cyclops did, in fact, heave it or not; and, together
with its six companions, it stands out bravely and with fine sculpturesque
effect against the horizon. A few miles farther on is Catania, the second
city in population and importance of Sicily, but, except for one advantage
which would give distinction to the least interesting of places, by no
means the second in respect of beauty. As a town, indeed, it is
commonplace. Its bay, though of ample proportions, has no particular grace
of contour; and even the clustering masts in its busy harbor scarcely
avail to break the monotony of that strip of houses on the flat seaboard,
which, apart from its surroundings, is all that constitutes Catania. But
with Etna brooding over it day and night, and the town lying outstretched
and nestling between the two vast arms which the giant thrusts out towards
the sea on each side, Catania could not look wholly prosaic and
uninteresting even if she tried.

We must again return to the mountain, for Etna, it must be remembered, is
a persistent feature, is the persistent feature of the landscape along
nearly the whole eastern coast of Sicily from Punta di Faro to the Cape of
Santa Croce, if not to the promontory of Syracuse. Its omnipresence
becomes overawing as one hour of travel succeeds another and the great
mountain is as near as ever. For miles upon miles by this southward course
it haunts the traveller like a reproving conscience. Each successive stage
on his journey gives him only a different and not apparently more distant
view. Its height, ten thousand feet, although, of course, considerable,
seems hardly sufficient to account for this perpetual and unabating
prominence, which, however, is partly to be explained by the outward trend
taken by the sea-coast after we pass Catania, and becoming more and more
marked during the journey from that city to Syracuse. There could be no
better plan of operations for one who wishes to view the great mountain
thoroughly, continuously, protractedly, and at its best, than to await a
favorable afternoon, and then to take the journey in question by railway,
so timing it as to reach the tongue of Santa Croce about sunset. From
Catania to Lentini the traveller has Etna, wherever visible, on his right;
at Lentini the line of railway takes a sharp turn to the left, and,
striking the coast at Agnone, hugs it all along the northern shore of the
promontory, terminating with Cape Santa Croce, upon approaching which
point it doubles back upon itself, to follow the "re-entering angle" of
the cape, and then, once more turning to the left, runs nearly due
southward along the coast to Syracuse. Throughout the twenty miles or so
from Lentini to Augusta, beneath the promontory of Santa Croce, Etna lies
on the traveller's left, with the broad blue bay fringed for part of the
way by a mile-wide margin of gleaming sand between him and it. Then the
great volcanic cone, all its twenty miles from summit to sea-coast
foreshortened into nothingness by distance, seems to be rising from the
very sea; its long-cooled lava streams might almost be mingling with the
very waters of the bay. As the rays of the westering sun strike from
across the island upon silver-gray sand and blue-purple sea and
russet-iron mountain slopes, one's first impulse is to exclaim with
Wordsworth, in vastly differing circumstances, that "earth hath not
anything to show more fair." But it has. For he who can prolong his view
of the mountain until after the sun has actually sunk will find that even
the sight he has just witnessed can be surpassed. He must wait for the
moment when the silver has gone out of the sand, and the purple of the sea
has changed to gray, and the russet of Etna's lava slopes is deepening
into black; for that is also the moment when the pink flush of the
departed sunset catches its peak and closes the symphony of color with a
chord more exquisitely sweet than all.

From Cape Santa Croce to Syracuse the route declines a little perhaps in
interest. The great volcano which has filled the eye throughout the
journey is now less favorably placed for the view, and sometimes, as when
the railway skirts the Bay of Megara in a due southward direction, is
altogether out of sight. Nor does the approach to Syracuse quite prepare
one for the pathetic charm of this most interesting of the great, dead,
half-deserted cities of the ancient world, or even for the singular beauty
of its surroundings. You have to enter the inhabited quarter itself, and
to take up your abode on that mere sherd and fragment of old Greek
Syracuse, the Island of Ortygia, to which the present town is confined (or
rather, you have to begin by doing this, and then to sally forth on a long
walk of exploration round the contorni , to trace the line of the ancient
fortifications, and to map out as best you may the four other quarters,
each far larger than Ortygia, which, long since given over to
orange-gardens and scattered villas and farmhouses, were once no doubt
well-peopled districts of the ancient city), ere you begin either to
discover its elements of material beauty or to feel anything of its
spiritual magic. It is hard to believe that this decayed and apparently
still decaying little island town was once the largest of the Hellenic
cities, twenty miles, according to Strabo, in circumference, and even in
the time of Cicero containing in one of its now deserted quarters "a very
large Forum, most beautiful porticoes, a highly decorated Town Hall, a
most spacious Senate House, and a superb Temple of Jupiter Olympius." A
spoiler more insatiable than Verres has, alas! carried off all these
wonders of art and architecture, and of most of them not even a trace of
the foundations remains. Of the magnificent Forum a single unfluted column
appears to be the solitary relic. The porticoes, the Town Hall, the Senate
House, the Temple of the Olympian Jove are irrecoverable even by the most
active architectural imagination. But the west wall of the district which
contained these treasures is still partially traceable, and in the
adjoining quarter of the ancient city we find ourselves in its richest
region both of the archÃ¦ological and the picturesque.

For here is the famous Latomia del Paradiso, quarry, prison, guard-house,
and burial-place of the Syracusan Greek, and the yet more famous Theater,
inferior to that of Taormina in the completeness of the stage and
proscenium, but containing the most perfectly preserved auditorium in the
world. The entrance to the Latomia, that gigantic, ear-shaped orifice hewn
out of the limestone cliff, and leading into a vast whispering-chamber,
the acoustic properties of which have caused it to be identified with the
(historic or legendary) Ear of Dionysius, has a strange, wild
impressiveness of its own. But in beauty though not in grandeur it is
excelled by another abandoned limestone quarry in the neighborhood, which
has been converted by its owner into an orangery. This lies midway between
the Latomia del Paradiso and the Quarry of the Cappuccini, and is in truth
a lovely retreat. Over it broods the perfect stillness that never seems so
deep as in those deserted places which have once been haunts of busy life.
It is rich in the spiritual charm of natural beauty and the sensuous
luxury of sub-tropical culture: close at hand the green and gold of orange
trees, in the middle distance the solemn plumes of the cypresses, and
farther still the dazzling white walls of the limestone which the blue sky
bends down to meet.

To pass from the quarries to the remains of the Greek Theater hard by is
in some measure to exchange the delight of the eye for the subtler
pleasures of mental association. Not that the concentric curves of these
moldering and moss-lined stone benches are without their appeal to the
senses. On the contrary, they are beautiful in themselves, and, like all
architectural ruins, than which no animate things in nature more perfectly
illustrate the scientific doctrine of "adaptation to environment," they
harmonize deliciously in line and tone with their natural surroundings.
Yet to most people, and especially so to those of the contemplative habit,
the Greek Theater at Syracuse, like the Amphitheaters of Rome and Verona,
will be most impressive at moments when the senses are least active and
the imagination busiest. It is when we abstract the mind from the existing
conditions of the ruin; it is when we "restore" it by those processes of
mental architecture which can never blunder into Vandalism; it is when we
re-people its silent, time-worn benches with the eager, thronging life of
twenty centuries ago, that there is most of magic in its spell. And here
surely imagination has not too arduous a task, so powerfully is it
assisted by the wonderful completeness of these remains. More than forty
tiers of seats shaped out of the natural limestone of the rock can still
be quite distinctly traced; and though their marble facings have of course
long moldered into dust, whole cunei of them are still practically as
uninjured by time, still as fit for the use for which they were intended,
as when the Syracusans of the great age of Attic Drama flocked hither to
hear the tragedies of that poet whom they so deeply reverenced that to be
able to recite his verse was an accomplishment rewarded in the prisoners
who possessed it by liberation from bondage. To the lover of classical
antiquity Syracuse will furnish "moments" in abundance; but at no other
spot either in Ortygia itself or in these suburbs of the modern city, not
at the Fountain of Arethusa on the brink of the great port; not in the
Temple of Minerva, now the Cathedral, with its Doric columns embedded in
the ignominy of plaster; not in that wildest and grandest of those ancient
Syracusan quarries, the Latomia dei Cappuccini, where the ill-fated
remnant of the routed army of Nicias is supposed to have expiated in
forced labor the failure of the Sicilian Expedition, will he find it so
easy to rebuild the ruined past as here on this desolate plateau, with
these perfect monuments of the immortal Attic stage around him, and at his
feet the town, the harbor, the promontory of Plemmyrium, the blue waters
of the Ionian Sea.

It is time, however, to resume our journey and to make for that hardly
less interesting or less beautifully situated town of Sicily which is
usually the next halting-place of the traveller. The route to Girgenti
from Syracuse is the most circuitous piece of railway communication in the
island. To reach our destination it is necessary to retrace our steps
almost the whole way back to Catania. At Bicocca, a few miles distant from
that city, the line branches off into the interior of the country for a
distance of some fifty or sixty miles, when it is once more deflected, and
then descends in a southwesterly direction towards the coast. At a few
miles from the sea, within easy reach of its harbor, Porto Empedocle, lies
Girgenti. The day's journey will have been an interesting one. Throughout
its westward course the line, after traversing the fertile Plain of
Catania, the rich grain-bearing district which made Sicily the granary of
the Roman world, ascends gradually into a mountainous region and plunges
between Calascibetta and Castrogiovanni into a tortuous ravine, above
which rise towering the two last-named heights. The latter of the two is
planted on the site of the plain of Enna, the scene of the earliest
abduction recorded in history. Flowers no longer flourish in the same
abundance on the meads from which Persephone was carried off by the Dark
King of Hades; but the spot is still fair and fertile, truly a "green
navel of the isle," the central Omphalos from which the eye ranges
northward, eastward, and south-westward over each expanse of Trinacria's
triple sea. But those who do not care to arrest their journey for the sake
of sacrificing to Demeter, or of enjoying the finest, in the sense of the
most extensive, view in Sicily, may yet admire the noble situation of the
rock-built town of Castrogiovanni, looking down upon the railway from its
beetling crag.

Girgenti, the City of Temples, the richest of all places in the world
save one in monuments of Pagan worship, conceals its character effectually
enough from him who enters it from the north. Within the precincts of the
existing city there is little sign to be seen of its archÃ¦ological
treasures, and, to tell the truth, it has but few attractions of its own.
Agrigentum, according to Pindar "the most beautiful city of mortals," will
not so strike a modern beholder; but that, no doubt, is because, like
Syracuse and other famous seats of ancient art and religious reverence, it
has shrunk to dimensions so contracted as to leave all the riches of those
stately edifices to which it owed the fame of its beauty far outside its
present boundaries. Nothing, therefore, need detain the traveller in the
town itself (unless, indeed, he would snatch a brief visit to the
later-built cathedral, remarkable for nothing but the famous marble
sarcophagus with its relief of the Myth of Hippolytus), and he will do
well to mount the Rupe Atenea without delay. The view, however, in every
direction is magnificent, the town to the right of the spectator and
behind him, the sea in front, and the rolling, ruin-dotted plain between.
From this point Girgenti itself looks imposing enough with the irregular
masses of its roofs and towers silhouetted against the sky. But it is the
seaward view which arrests and detains the eye. Hill summit or hotel
window, it matters little what or where your point of observation is, you
have but to look from the environs of Girgenti towards Porto Empedocle, a
few miles to the south, and you bring within your field of vision a space
of a few dozen acres in extent which one may reasonably suppose to have no
counterpart in any area of like dimensions on the face of the globe. It is
a garden of moldering shrines, a positive orchard of shattered porticoes
and broken column-shafts, and huge pillars prostrate at the foot of their
enormous plinths. You can count and identify and name them all even from
where you stand. Ceres and Proserpine, Juno Lacinia, Concord, Hercules,
Ã†sculapius, Jupiter Olympius, Castor and Pollux, all are visible at once,
all recognizable and numerable from east to west in their order as above.
It is a land of ruined temples, and, to all appearance, of nothing else.
One can just succeed, indeed, in tracing the coils of the railway as it
winds like a black snake towards Porto Empedocle, but save that there are
no signs of life. One descries no wagon upon the roads, no horse in the
furrows, no laborer among the vines. Girgenti itself, with its hum and
clatter, lies behind you; no glimpse of life or motion is visible on the
quays of the port. All seems as desolate as those gray and moldering fanes
of the discrowned gods, a solitude which only changes in character without
deepening in intensity as the eye travels across the foam-fringed
coast-line out on the sailless sea. There is a strange beauty in this
silent Pantheon of dead deities, this landscape which might almost seem to
be still echoing the last wail of the dying Pan; and it is a beauty of
death and desolation to which the like of nature, here especially
abounding, contributes not a little by contrast. For nowhere in Sicily is
the country-side more lavishly enriched by the olive. Its contorted stem
and quivering, silvery foliage are everywhere. Olives climb the
hill-slopes in straggling files; olives cluster in twos and threes and
larger groups upon the level plain; olives trace themselves against the
broken walls of the temples, and one catches the flicker of their branches
in the sunlight that streams through the roofless peristyles. From Rupe
Atenea out across the plain to where the eye lights upon the white loops
of the road to Porto Empedocle one might almost say that every object
which is not a temple or a fragment of a temple is an olive tree.

By far the most interesting of the ruins from the archÃ¦ologist's point of
view is that of the Temple of Concord, which, indeed, is one of the
best-preserved in existence, thanks, curiously enough, to the religious
Philistinism which in the Middle Ages converted it into a Christian
church. It was certainly not in the spirit of its tutelary goddess that it
was so transformed: nothing, no doubt, was farther from the thoughts of
those who thus appropriated the shrine of Concord than to illustrate the
doctrine of the unity of religion. But art and archÃ¦ology, if not romance,
have good reason to thank them that they "took over" the building on any
grounds, for it is, of course, to this circumstance that we owe its
perfect condition of preservation, and the fact that all the details of
the Doric style as applied to religious architecture can be studied in
this temple while so much of so many of its companion fanes has crumbled
into indistinguishable ruin. Concordia has remained virtually intact
through long centuries under the homely title of "the Church of St.
Gregory of the Turnips," and it rears its stately faÃ§ade before the
spectator in consequence with architrave complete, a magnificent hexastyle
of thirty-four columns, its lateral files of thirteen shafts apiece
receding in noble lines of perspective. Juno Lacinia, or Juno Lucinda (for
it may have been either as the "Lacinian Goddess" or as the Goddess of
Childbed that Juno was worshipped here), an older fane than Concordia,
though the style had not yet entered on its decline when the latter temple
was built, is to be seen hard by, a majestic and touching ruin. It dates
from the fifth century B. C., and is therefore Doric of the best period.
Earthquakes, it seems, have co-operated with time in the work of
destruction, and though twenty-five whole pillars are left standing, the
faÃ§ade, alas! is represented only by a fragment of architrave. More
extensive still have been the ravages inflicted on the Temple of Hercules
by his one unconquerable foe. This great and famous shrine, much venerated
of old by the Agrigentines, and containing that statue of the god which
the indefatigable "collector" Verres vainly endeavored to loot, is now
little more than a heap of tumbled masonry, with one broken column-shaft
alone still standing at one extremity of its site. But it is among the
remains of the ancient sanctuary of Zeus, all unfinished, though that
edifice was left by its too ambitious designers, that we get the best idea
of the stupendous scale on which those old-world religious architects and
masons worked. The ruin itself has suffered cruelly from the hand of man;
so much so, indeed, that little more than the ground plan of the temple is
to be traced by the lines of column bases, vast masses of its stone having
been removed from its site to be used in the construction of the Mole. But
enough remains to show the gigantic scale on which the work was planned
and partially carried out. The pillars which once stood upon those bases
were twenty feet in circumference, or more than two yards in diameter and
each of their flutings forms a niche big enough to contain a man! Yon
Caryatid, who has been carefully and skillfully pieced together from the
fragments doubtless of many Caryatids, and who now lies, hands under head,
supine and staring at the blue sky above him, is more than four times the
average height of a man. From the crown of his bowed head to his stony
soles he measures twenty-five feet, and to watch a tourist sitting by or
on him and gazing on Girgenti in the distance is to be visited by a touch
of that feeling of the irony of human things to which Shelley gives
expression in his "Ozymandias."

The railway route from Girgenti to Palermo is less interesting than that
from Catania to Girgenti. It runs pretty nearly due south and north across
the island from shore to shore, through a country mountainous indeed, as
is Sicily everywhere, but not marked by anything particularly striking in
the way of highland scenery. At Termini we strike the northern coast, and
the line branches off to the west. Another dozen miles or so brings us to
Santa Flavia, whence it is but half an hour's walk to the ruins of
Soluntum, situated on the easternmost hill of the promontory of Catalfano.
The coast-view from this point is striking, and on a clear day the
headland of Cefalu, some twenty miles away to the eastward, is plainly
visible. Ten more miles of "westing" and we approach Palermo, the Sicilian
capital, a city better entered from the sea, to which it owes its beauty
as it does its name.

To the traveller fresh from Girgenti and its venerable ruins, or from
Syracuse with its classic charm, the first impressions of Palermo may very
likely prove disappointing. Especially will they be so if he has come with
a mind full of historic enthusiasm and a memory laden with the records of
Greek colonization, Saracen dominion, and Norman conquest, and expecting
to find himself face to face with the relics and remainder of at any rate
the modern period of the three. For Palermo is emphatically what the
guide-books are accustomed to describe as "a handsome modern city"; which
means, as most people familiar with the Latin countries are but too well
aware, a city as like any number of other Continental cities, built and
inhabited by Latin admirers and devotees of Parisian "civilization," as
"two peas in a pod." In the Sicilian capital the passion for the
monotonous magnificence of the boulevard has been carried to an almost
amusing pitch. Palermo may be regarded from this point of view as
consisting of two most imposing boulevards of approximately equal length,
each bisecting the city with scrupulous equality from east to west and
from north to south, and intersecting each other in its exact center at
the mathematically precise angle of ninety degrees. You stand at the Porta
Felice, the water-gate of the city, with your back to the sea, and before
you, straight as a die, stretches the handsome Via Vittorio Emanuele for a
mile or more ahead. You traverse the handsome Via Vittorio Emanuele for
half its length and you come to the Quattro Canti, a small octagonal
piazza which boasts itself to be the very head of Palermo, and from this
intersection of four cross-roads, you see stretching to right and left of
you the equally handsome Via Macqueda. Walk down either of these two great
thoroughfares, the Macqueda or the Vittorio Emanuele, and you will be
equally satisfied with each; the only thing which may possibly mar your
satisfaction will be your consciousness that you would be equally
satisfied with the other, and, indeed, that it requires an effort of
memory to recollect in which of the two you are. There is nothing to
complain of in the architecture or decoration of the houses. All is
correct, regular, and symmetrical in line, bright and cheerful in color,
and, as a whole, absolutely wanting in individuality and charm.

It is, however, of course impossible to kill an ancient and interesting
city altogether with boulevards. Palermo, like every other city, has its
"bits," to be found without much difficulty by anyone who will quit the
beaten track of the two great thoroughfares and go a-questing for them
himself. He may thus find enough here and there to remind him that he is
living on the "silt" of three, nay, four civilizations, on a fourfold
formation to which Greek and Roman, Saracen and Norman, have each
contributed its successive layer. It need hardly be said that the latter
has left the deepest traces of any. The Palazzo Reale, the first of the
Palermitan sights to which the traveller is likely to bend his way, will
afford the best illustration of this. Saracenic in origin, it has received
successive additions from half-a-dozen Norman princes, from Robert
Guiscard downwards, and its chapel, the Cappella Palatina, built by Roger
II. in the early part of the twelfth century, is a gem of decorative art
which would alone justify a journey to Sicily to behold. The purely
architectural beauties of the interior are impressive enough, but the eye
loses all sense of them among the wealth of their decoration. The stately
files of Norman arches up the nave would in any other building arrest the
gaze of the spectator, but in the Cappella Palatina one can think of
nothing but mosaics. Mosaics are everywhere, from western door to eastern
window, and from northern to southern transept wall. A full-length,
life-sized saint in mosaic grandeur looks down upon you from every
interval between the arches of the nave, and medallions of saints in
mosaic, encircled with endless tracery and arabesque, form the inner face
of every arch. Mosaic angels float with outstretched arms above the apse.
A colossal Madonna and Bambino, overshadowed by a hovering PÃ¨re Eternel,
peer dimly forth in mosaic across the altar through the darkness of the
chancel. The ground is golden throughout, and the somber richness of the
effect is indescribable. In Palermo and its environs, in the Church of
Martorana, and in the Cathedral of Monreale, no less than here, there is
an abundance of that same decoration, and the mosaics of the latter of the
two edifices above mentioned are held to be the finest of all; but it is
by those of the Cappella Palatina, the first that he is likely to make the
acquaintance of, that the visitor, not being an expert or connoisseur in
this particular species of art-work, will perhaps be the most deeply
impressed.

The Palazzo Reale may doubtless too be remembered by him, as affording him
the point of view from which he has obtained his first idea of the
unrivaled situation of Palermo. From the flat roof of the Observatory,
fitted up in the tower of S. Ninfa, a noble panorama lies stretched around
us. The spectator is standing midway between Amphitrite and the Golden
Shell that she once cast in sport upon the shore. Behind him lies the
Conca d'Oro, with the range of mountains against which it rests, Grifone
and Cuccio, and the Billieni Hills, and the road to Monreale winding up
the valley past La Rocca; in front lies the noble curve of the gulf, from
Cape Mongerbino to the port, the bold outlines of Monte Pellegrino, the
Bay of Mondello still farther to the left, and Capo di Gallo completing
the coast-line with its promontory dimly peering through the haze.
Palermo, however, does not perhaps unveil the full beauty of its situation
elsewhere than down at the sea's edge, with the city nestling in the curve
behind one and Pellegrino rising across the waters in front.

But the environs of the city, which are of peculiar interest and
attraction, invite us, and first among these is Monreale, at a few miles'
distance, a suburb to which the traveller ascends by a road commanding at
every turn some new and striking prospect of the bay. On one hand as he
leaves the town, lies the Capuchin Monastery, attractive with its
catacombs of mummified ex-citizens of Palermo to the lover of the gruesome
rather than of the picturesque. Farther on is the pretty Villa Tasca, then
La Rocca, whence by a winding road of very ancient construction we climb
the royal mount crowned by the famous Cathedral and Benedictine Abbey of
Monreale. Here more mosaics, as has been said, as fine in quality and in
even greater abundance than those which decorate the interior of the
Cappella Palatina; they cover, it is said, an area of seventy thousand
four hundred square feet. From the Cathedral we pass into the beautiful
cloisters, and thence into the fragrant orange-garden, from which another
delightful view of the valley towards Palermo is obtained. San Martino,
the site of a suppressed Benedictine monastery, is the next spot of
interest. A steep path branching off to the right from Monreale leads to a
deserted fort, named Il Castellaccio, from which the road descends as far
as S. Martino, whence a pleasant journey back to Palermo is made through
the picturesque valley of Bocca di Falco.

The desire to climb a beautiful mountain is as strong as if climbing it
were not as effectual a way of hiding its beauties as it would be to sit
upon its picture; and Monte Pellegrino, sleeping in the sunshine, and
displaying the noble lines of what must surely be one of the most
picturesque mountains in the world, is likely enough to lure the traveller
to its summit. That mass of gray limestone, which takes such an exquisite
flush under the red rays of the evening, is not difficult to climb. The
zigzag path which mounts its sides is plainly visible from the town, and
though steep at first, it grows gradually easier of ascent on the upper
slopes of the mountain. Pellegrino was originally an island, and is still
separated by the plain of the Conca d'Oro from the other mountains near
the coast. Down to a few centuries ago it was clothed with underwood, and
in much earlier times it grew corn for the soldiers of Hamilcar Barca, who
occupied it in the first Punic War. Under an overhanging rock on its
summit is the Grotto of Sta. Rosalia, the patron saint of the city, the
maiden whom tradition records to have made this her pious retreat several
centuries ago, and the discovery of whose remains in 1664 had the effect
of instantaneously staying the ravages of the plague by which Palermo was
just then being desolated. The grotto has since been converted, as under
the circumstances was only fitting, into a church, to which many
pilgrimages are undertaken by the devout. A steep path beyond the chapel
leads to the survey station on the mountain top, from which a
far-stretching view is commanded. The cone of Etna, over eighty miles off
as the crow flies, can be seen from here, and still farther to the north,
among the LiparÃ¦an group, the everlasting furnaces of Stromboli and
Vulcano. There is a steeper descent of the mountain towards the southwest,
and either by this or by retracing our original route we regain the road,
which skirts the base of the mountain on the west, and, at four miles'
distance from the gate of the town, conducts to one of the most charmingly
situated retreats that monarch ever constructed for himself, the royal
villa-chateau of La Favorita, erected by Ferdinand IV. (Ferdinand I. of
the Two Sicilies), otherwise not the least uncomfortable of the series of
uncomfortable princes whom the Bourbons gave to the South Italian
peoples.

Great as are the attractions of Palermo, they will hardly avail to detain
the visitor during the rest of his stay in Sicily. For him who wishes to
see Trinacria thoroughly, and who has already made the acquaintance of
Messina and Syracuse, of Catania and Girgenti, the capital forms the most
convenient of head-quarters from which to visit whatever places of
interest remain to be seen in the western and southwestern corner of the
island. For it is hence that, in the natural order of things, he would
start for Marsala (famous as the landing-place of "the Thousand," under
Garibaldi, in 1860, and the commencement of that memorable march which
ended in a few weeks in the overthrow of the Bourbon rule) and Trapani
(from drepanon ), another sickle-shaped town, dear to the Virgilian
student as the site of the games instituted by Ã†neas to the memory of the
aged Anchises, who died at Eryx, a poetically appropriate spot for a lover
of Aphrodite to end his days in. The town of the goddess on the top of
Monte San Giuliano, the ancient Eryx, is fast sinking to decay. Degenerate
descendants, or successors would perhaps be more correct, of her ancient
worshippers prefer the plain at its foot, and year by year migrations take
place thither which threaten to number this immemorial settlement of pagan
antiquity among the dead cities of the past, and to leave its grass-grown
streets and moldering cathedral alone with the sea and sky. There are no
remains of the world-famed shrine of Venus Erycina now save a few traces
of its foundation and an ancient reservoir, once a fountain dedicated to
the goddess. One need not linger on San Giuliano longer than is needful to
survey the mighty maritime panorama which surrounds the spectator, and to
note Cape Bon in Africa rising faintly out of the southward haze.

For Selinunto has to be seen, and Segesta, famous both for the grandeur
and interest of their Greek remains. From Castelvetrano station, on the
return route, it is but a short eight miles to the ruins of Selinus, the
westernmost of the Hellenic settlements of Sicily, a city with a history
of little more than two centuries of active life, and of upwards of two
thousand years of desolation. Pammilus of Megara founded it, so says
legend, in the seventh century B. C. In the fifth century of that era the
Carthaginians destroyed it. Ever since that day it has remained deserted
except as a hiding-place for the early Christians in the days of their
persecution, and as a stronghold of the Mohammedans in their resistance to
King Roger. Yet in its short life of some two hundred and twenty years it
became, for some unknown reason of popular sanctity, the site of no fewer
than seven temples, four of them among the largest ever known to have
existed. Most of them survive, it is true, only in the condition of
prostrate fragments, for it is supposed that earthquake and not time has
been their worst foe, and the largest of them, dedicated to Hercules, or
as some hold, to Appollo, was undoubtedly never finished at all. Its
length, including steps, reaches the extraordinary figure of three hundred
and seventy-one feet; its width, including steps, is a hundred and
seventy-seven feet; while its columns would have soared when completed to
the stupendous height of fifty-three feet. It dates from the fifth century
B. C., and it was probably the appearance of the swarthy Carthaginian
invaders which interrupted the masons at their work. It now lies a
colossal heap of mighty, prostrate, broken columns, their flutings worn
nearly smooth by time and weather, and of plinths shaped and rounded by
the same agencies into the similitude of gigantic mountain boulders.

It is, however, the temples of Selinunto rather than their surroundings
which command admiration and in this respect they stand in marked contrast
to that site of a single unnamed ruin, which is, perhaps, taking site and
ruin together, the most "pathetic" piece of the picturesque in all Sicily,
the hill and temple of Segesta. From Calatafimi, scene of one of the
Garibaldian battles, to Segesta the way lies along the Castellamare road,
and through a beautiful and well-watered valley. The site of the town
itself is the first to be reached. Monte Barbaro, with the ruins of the
theater, lies to the north, to the west the hill whereon stands the famous
Temple. No one needs a knowledge of Greek archÃ¦ology or Greek history, or
even a special love for Greek art, in order to be deeply moved by the
spectacle which the spot presents. He needs no more than the capacity of
Virgil's hero to be touched by "the sense of tears in mortal things." The
Temple itself is perfect, except that its columns are still unfluted; but
it is not the simple and majestic outline of the building, its lines of
lessening columns, or its massive architraves upborne upon those mighty
shafts, which most impress us, but the harmony between this great work of
man and its natural surroundings. In this mountain solitude, and before
this deserted shrine of an extinct worship we are in presence of the union
of two desolations, and one had well-nigh said of two eternities, the
everlasting hills and the imperishable yearnings of the human heart. No
words can do justice to the lonely grandeur of the Temple of Segesta. It
is unlike any other in Sicily in this matter of unique position. It has
no rival temple near it, nor are there even the remains of any other
building, temple or what not, to challenge comparison, within sight of the
spectator. This ruin stands alone in every sense, alone in point of
physical isolation, alone in the austere pathos which that position
imparts to it.

In the Museum of Palermo, to which city the explorer of these ruined
sanctuaries of art and religion may now be supposed to have returned, the
interesting metopes of Selinus will recall the recollection of that
greater museum of ruins which he just visited at Selinunto; but the
suppressed monastery, which has been now turned into a Museo Nazionale,
has not much else besides its Hellenic architectural fragments to detain
him. And it may be presumed, perhaps, that the pursuit of antiquities,
which may be hunted with so much greater success in other parts of the
islands, is not precisely the object which leads most visitors to Sicily
to prolong their stay in this beautifully seated city. Its attraction
lies, in effect and almost wholly, in the characteristic noted in the
phrase just used. Architecturally speaking, Palermo is naught: it is
branded, as has been already said, with the banality and want of
distinction of all modern Italian cities of the second class. And,
moreover, all that man has ever done for her external adornment she can
show you in a few hours; but days and weeks would not more than suffice
for the full appreciation of all she owes to nature. Antiquities she has
none, or next to none, unless, indeed, we are prepared to include relics
of the comparatively modern Norman domination, which of course abound in
her beautiful mosaics, in that category. The silt of successive ages, and
the detritus of a life which from the earliest times has been a busy one,
have irrecoverably buried almost all vestiges of her classic past. Her
true, her only, but her all-sufficient attraction is conveyed in her
ancient name. She is indeed "Panormus"; it is as the "all harbor city"
that she fills the eye and mind and lingers in the memory and lives anew
in the imagination. When the city itself and its environs as far as
Monreale and San Martino and La Zisa have been thoroughly explored; when
the imposing Porta Felice has been duly admired; when the beautiful
gardens of La Flora, with its wealth of sub-tropical vegetation, has been
sufficiently promenaded on; when La Cala, a quaint little narrow, shallow
harbor, and the busy life on its quays have been adequately studied; then
he who loves nature better than the works of man, and prefers the true
eternal to the merely figurative "immortal," will confess to himself that
Palermo has nothing fairer, nothing more captivating, to show than that
 chef-d' oeuvre which the Supreme Artificer executed in shaping those
noble lines of rock in which Pellegrino descends to the city at its foot,
and in tracing that curve of coast-line upon which the city has sprung up
under the mountain's shadow. The view of this guardian and patron height,
this tutelary rock, as one might almost fancy it, of the Sicilian capital
is from all points and at all hours beautiful. It dominates the city and
the sea alike from whatever point one contemplates it, and the bold yet
soft beauty of its contours has in every aspect a never-failing charm. The
merest lounger, the most frivolous of promenaders in Palermo, should
congratulate himself on having always before his eyes a mountain, the mere
sight of which may be almost described as a "liberal education" in poetry
and art. He should haunt the Piazza Marina, however, not merely at the
promenading time of day, but then also, nay, then most of all, when the
throng has begun to thin, and, as Homer puts it, "all the ways are
shadowed," at the hour of sunset. For then the clear Mediterranean air is
at its clearest, the fringing foam at its whitest, the rich, warm
background of the Conca d'Oro at its mellowest, while the bare,
volcanic-looking sides of Monte Pellegrino seem fusing into ruddy molten
metal beneath the slanting rays. Gradually, as you watch the color die out
of it, almost as it dies out of a snow-peak at the fading of the
 Alpen-gluth , the shadows begin to creep up the mountain-sides,
forerunners of the night which has already fallen upon the streets of the
city, and through which its lights are beginning to peer. A little longer,
and the body of the mountain will be a dark, vague mass, with only its
cone and graceful upper ridges traced faintly against pale depths of sky.

Thus and at such an hour may one see the city, bay, and mountain at what
may be called their Ã¦sthetic or artistic best. But they charm, and with a
magic of almost equal potency, at all hours. The fascination remains
unabated to the end, and never, perhaps, is it more keenly felt by the
traveller than when Palermo is smiling her God-speed upon the parting
guest, and from the deck of the steamer which is to bear him away he waves
his last farewell to the receding city lying couched, the loveliest of
Ocean's Nereids, in her shell of gold.

If his hour of departure be in the evening, when the rays of the westering
sun strike athwart the base of Pellegrino, and tip with fire the summits
of the low-lying houses of the seaport, and stream over and past them upon
the glowing waters of the harbor the sight is one which will not be soon
forgotten. Dimmer and dimmer grows the beautiful city with the increasing
distance and the gathering twilight. The warm rose-tints of the noble
mountain cool down into purple, and darken at last into a heavy mass of
somber shadows; the sea changes to that spectral silver which overspreads
it in the gloaming. It is a race between the flying steamer and the
falling night to hide the swiftly fading coast-line altogether from the
view; and so close is the contest that up to the last it leaves us
doubtful whether it be darkness or distance that has taken it from us. But
in a few more minutes, be it from one cause or from the other, the
effacement is complete. Behind us, where Palermo lay a while ago, there
looms only a bank of ever-darkening haze, and before the bows of our
vessel the gray expanse of Mediterranean waters which lie between us and
the Bay of Naples.




XIV

NAPLES
Naples in itself, apart from its surroundings, is not of surpassing
beauty. Its claim to be "the most beautiful city in Europe" rests solely
on the adventitious aid of situation. When the fictitious charm which
distance gives is lost by a near approach, it will be seen that the city
which has inspired the poets of all ages is little more than a huge,
bustling, commonplace commercial port, not to be compared for a moment,
Ã¦sthetically speaking, with Genoa, Florence, Venice, or many other Italian
towns equally well known to the traveller. This inherent lack is, however,
more than compensated for by the unrivaled natural beauties of its
position, and of its charming environs. No town in Europe, not Palermo
with its "Golden Shell," Constantinople with its "Golden Horn," nor Genoa,
the "Gem of the Riviera," can boast of so magnificent a situation. The
traveller who approaches Naples by sea may well be excused for any
exuberance of language. As the ship enters the Gulf, passing between the
beautiful isles of Ischia and Capri, which seem placed like twin outposts
to guard the entrance of this watery paradise, the scene is one which will
not soon fade from the memory. All around stretches the bay in its azure
immensity, its sweeping curves bounded on the right by the rocky
Sorrentine promontory, with Sorrento, Meta, and a cluster of little
fishing villages nestling in the olive-clad precipices, half hidden by
orange groves and vineyards, and the majestic form of Monte Angelo
towering above. Farther along the coast, Vesuvius, the tutelary genius of
the scene, arrests the eye, its vine-clad lower slopes presenting a
startling contrast to the dark cone of the volcano belching out fire and
smoke, a terrible earnest of the hidden powers within. On the left the
graceful undulations of the Camaldoli hills descend to the beautifully
indented bay of Pozzuoli, which looks like a miniature replica of the
parent gulf with the volcano of Monte Nuovo for its Vesuvius. Then
straight before the spectator lies a white mass like a marble quarry;
this, with a white projecting line losing itself in the graceful curve of
Vesuvius, resolves itself, as the steamer draws nearer, into Naples and
its suburbs of Portici and Torre del Greco. Beyond, in the far background,
the view is shut in by a phantom range of snowy peaks, an offshoot of the
Abruzzi Mountains, faintly discerned in the purple haze of the horizon.
All these varied prospects unite to form a panorama which, for beauty and
extent, is hardly to be matched in Europe.

This bald and inadequate description may perhaps serve to explain one
reason for the pre-eminence among the many beautiful views in the South of
Europe popularly allowed to the Bay of Naples. One must attribute the
Ã¦sthetic attraction of the Bay a good deal to the variety of beautiful and
striking objects comprised in the view. Here we have not merely a
magnificent bay with noble, sweeping curves (the deeply indented coasts of
the Mediterranean boast many more extensive), but in addition we have in
this comparatively circumscribed area an unequaled combination of sea,
mountain, and island scenery. In short, the Gulf of Naples, with its
islands, capes, bays, straits, and peninsulas, is an epitome of the
principal physical features of the globe, and might well serve as an
object lesson for a child making its first essay at geography. Then, too,
human interest is not lacking. The mighty city of Naples, like a huge
octopus, stretches out its feelers right and left, forming the straggling
towns and villages which lie along the eastern and western shores of the
bay. A more plausible, if prosaic, reason for the popularity of the Bay of
Naples may, however, be found in its familiarity. Naples and Vesuvius are
as well known to us in prints, photographs, or engravings as St. Paul's
Cathedral or the Houses of Parliament. If other famous bays, Palermo or
Corinth, for instance, were equally well known, that of Naples would have
many rivals in popular estimation.

The traveller feels landing a terrible anticlimax. The noble prospect of
the city and the bay has raised his expectations to the highest pitch, and
the disenchantment is all the greater. The sordid surroundings of the
port, the worst quarter of the city, the squalor and filth of the streets,
preceded by the inevitable warfare with the rapacious rabble of yelling
boatmen, porters, and cab-drivers, make the disillusionized visitor
inclined to place a sinister interpretation on the equivocal maxim, Vedi
Napoli e poi mori ; and Goethe's aphorism, that a man can never be
utterly miserable who retains the recollection of Naples, seems to him the
hollowest mockery and the cruellest irony.

The streets of Naples are singularly lacking in architectural interest.
Not only are there few historic buildings or monuments, which is curious
when we consider the important part Naples played in the mediÃ¦val history
of the South of Europe, but there are not many handsome modern houses or
palaces of any pretensions. Not that Naples is wanting in interest. The
conventional sight-seer, who calls a place interesting in proportion to
the number of pages devoted to its principal attractions in the
guide-books, may, perhaps, contemptuously dismiss this great city as a
place which can be sufficiently well "done" in a couple of days; but to
the student of human nature Naples offers a splendid field in its varied
and characteristic scenes of street life. To those who look below the
surface, this vast hive of humanity, in which Italian life can be studied
in all its varied phases and aspects, cannot be wholly commonplace.

It is a truism that the life of Naples must be seen in the streets. The
street is the Neapolitan's bedroom, dining-room, dressing-room, club, and
recreation ground. The custom of making the streets the home is not
confined to the men. The fair sex are fond of performing al fresco 
toilettes, and may frequently be seen mutually assisting each other in the
dressing of their magnificent hair in full view of the passers-by.

As in Oriental cities, certain trades are usually confined to certain
streets or alleys in the poorer quarters of the town. The names at street
corners show that this custom is a long-established one. There are streets
solely for cutlers, working jewelers, second-hand bookstalls, and old
clothes shops, to name a few of the staple trades. The most curious of
these trading-streets is one not far from the Cathedral, confined to the
sale of religious wares; shrines, tawdry images, cheap crucifixes,
crosses, and rosaries make up the contents of these ecclesiastical marine
stores. This distinctive local character of the various arts and crafts is
now best exemplified in the Piazza degli Orefici. This square and the
adjoining streets are confined to silversmiths and jewelers, and here the
characteristic ornaments of the South Italian peasant women can still be
bought, though they are beginning to be replaced by the cheap,
machine-made abominations of Birmingham. Apart from the thronging crowds
surging up and down, these narrow streets and alleys are full of dramatic
interest. The curious characteristic habits and customs of the people may
best be studied in the poor quarters round the Cathedral. He who would
watch this shifting and ever-changing human kaleidoscope must not,
however, expect to do it while strolling leisurely along. This would be as
futile as attempting to stem the ebb and flow of the street currents, for
the streets are narrow and the traffic abundant. A doorway will be found a
convenient harbor of refuge from the long strings of heavily laden mules
and donkeys which largely replace vehicular traffic. A common and highly
picturesque object is the huge charcoal-burner's wagon, drawn usually by
three horses abreast. The richly decorated pad of the harness is very
noticeable, with its brilliant array of gaudy brass flags and the shining
 repoussÃ© plates, with figures of the Madonna and the saints, which,
together with the Pagan symbols of horns and crescents, are supposed to
protect the horses from harm. Unfortunately these talismans do not seem
able to protect them from the brutality of their masters. The Neapolitan's
cruelty to animals is proverbial. This characteristic is especially
noticeable on Festas and Sundays. A Neapolitan driver apparently considers
the seating capacity of a vehicle and the carrying power of a horse to be
limited only by the number of passengers who can contrive to hang on, and
with anything less than a dozen perched on the body of the cart, two or
three in the net, and a couple on the shafts, he will think himself weakly
indulgent to his steed. It is on the Castellamare Road on a Festa that the
visitor will best realize the astonishing elasticity of a Neapolitan's
notions as to the powers of a beast of burden. A small pony will often be
seen doing its best to drag uphill a load of twelve or fifteen hulking
adults, incited to its utmost efforts by physical suasion in the form of
sticks and whips, and moral suasion in the shape of shrill yells and
oaths. Their diabolical din seems to give some color to the saying that
"Naples is a paradise inhabited by devils."

The al fresco restaurants of the streets are curious and instructive.
That huge jar of oil simmering on a charcoal fire denotes a fried-fish
stall, where fish and "oil-cakes" are retailed at one sou a portion. These
stalls are much patronized by the very poor, with whom macaroni is an
almost unattainable luxury. At street corners a snail-soup stall may often
be seen, conspicuous by its polished copper pot. The poor consider snails
a great delicacy; and in this they are only following ancient customs, for
even in Roman times snails were in demand, if we may judge from the number
of snail-shells found among the Pompeii excavations. A picturesque feature
are the herds of goats. These ambulating dairies stream through the town
in the early morning. The intelligent beasts know their customers, and
each flock has its regular beat, which it takes of its own accord.
Sometimes the goats are milked in the streets, the pail being let down
from the upper floors of the houses by a string, a pristine type of
 ascenseur . Generally, though, the animal mounts the stairs to be milked,
and descends again in the most matter-of-fact manner.

The gaudily painted stalls of the iced-water and lemonade dealers give
warmth of color to the streets. There are several grades in the calling of
 acquaiolo (water-seller). The lowest member of the craft is the
peripatetic acquaiolo , who goes about furnished simply with a barrel of
iced water strapped on his back, and a basket of lemons slung to his
waist, and dispenses drinks at two centesimi a tumbler. It was thought
that the completion of the Serino aqueduct, which provides the whole of
Naples with excellent water at the numerous public fountains, would do
away with the time-honored water-seller; but it seems that the poorer
classes cannot do without a flavoring of some sort, and so this humble
fraternity continue as a picturesque adjunct of the streets. These are
only a few of the more striking objects of interest which the observer
will not fail to notice in his walks through the city. But we must leave
this fascinating occupation and turn to some of the regulation sights of
Naples.

Though, in proportion to its size, Naples contains fewer sights and
specific objects of interest than any other city in Italy, there are still
a few public buildings and churches which the tourist should not neglect.
There are quite half-a-dozen churches out of the twenty-five or thirty
noticed by the guide-books which fully repay the trouble of visiting them.
The Cathedral is in the old part of the town. Its chief interest lies in
the gorgeous Chapel of St. Januarius, the patron saint of Naples. In a
silver shrine under the richly decorated altar is the famous phial
containing the coagulated blood of the saint. This chapel was built at the
beginning of the seventeenth century, in fulfilment of a vow by the
grateful populace in honor of the saint who had saved their city "from the
fire of Vesuvius by the intercession of his precious blood." St. Januarius
is held in the highest veneration by the lower classes of Naples, with
whom the liquefaction ceremony, which takes place twice a year, is an
article of faith in which they place the most implicit reliance. The
history of the holy man is too well known to need repetition here. The
numerous miracles attributed to him, and the legends which have grown
round his name, would make no inconsiderable addition to the hagiological
literature of Italy.

Of the other churches, Sta. Chiara, S. Domenico Maggiore, and S. Lorenzo
are best worth visiting. In building Sta. Chiara the architect would seem
to have aimed at embodying, as far as possible, the idea of the church
militant, the exterior resembling a fortress rather than a place of
worship. In accordance with the notions of church restoration which
prevailed in the last century, Giotto's famous frescoes have been covered
with a thick coating of whitewash, the sapient official who was
responsible for the restoration considering these paintings too dark and
gloomy for mural decoration. Now the most noteworthy objects in the church
are the Gothic tombs of the Angevin kings.

The two churches of S. Domenico and S. Lorenzo are not far off, and the
sightseer in this city of "magnificent distances" is grateful to the
providence which has placed the three most interesting churches in Naples
within a comparatively circumscribed area. S. Domenico should be visited
next, as it contains some of the best examples of Renaissance sculpture in
Naples as Sta. Chiara does of Gothic art. It was much altered and repaired
in the course of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, but still
remains one of the handsomest of the Neapolitan churches. Its most
important monument is the marble group in relief of the Virgin, with SS.
Matthew and John, by Giovanni da Nola, which is considered to be the
sculptor's best work. The Gothic church of S. Lorenzo has fortunately
escaped in part the disfiguring hands of the seventeenth century restorer.
This church is of some literary and historical interest, Petrarch having
spent several months in the adjoining monastery; and it was here that
Boccaccio saw the beautiful princess immortalized in his tales by the name
of Fiammetta.

In order to appreciate the true historical and geographical significance
of Naples, we must remember that the whole of this volcanic district is
one great palimpsest, and that it is only with the uppermost and least
important inscription that we have hitherto concerned ourselves. To form
an adequate idea of this unique country we must set ourselves to decipher
the earlier-written inscriptions. For this purpose we must visit the
National Museum, which contains rich and unique collections of antiquities
elsewhere absolutely unrepresented. Here will be found the best treasures
from the buried towns of CumÃ¦, Herculaneum, and Pompeii. The history of
nearly a thousand years may be read in this vast necropolis of ancient
art.

To many, however, the living present has a deeper interest than the buried
past, and to these the innumerable beautiful excursions round Naples will
prove more attractive than all the wealth of antiquities in the Museum.
Certainly, from a purely Ã¦sthetic standpoint, all the best things in
Naples are out of it if the bull may be allowed. To reach Pozzuoli and the
classic district of BaiÃ¦ and CumÃ¦, we pass along the fine promenade of the
Villa Nazionale, which stretches from the Castello dell' Ovo (the Bastille
of Naples) to the Posilipo promontory, commanding, from end to end, superb
unobstructed views of the Bay. Capri, the central point of the prospect,
appears to change its form from day to day, like a fairy island.
Sometimes, on a cloudless day, the fantastic outlines of the cliffs stand
out clearly defined against the blue sea and the still bluer background of
the sky; the houses are plainly distinguished, and you can almost fancy
that you can descry the groups of idlers leaning over the parapet of the
little piazza, so clear is the atmosphere. Sometimes the island is bathed
in a bluish haze, and by a curious atmospheric effect a novel form of
 Fata Morgana is seen, the island, appearing to be lifted out of the
water and suspended between sea and sky.

The grounds of the Villa Nazionale are extensive, and laid out with taste,
but are disfigured by inferior plaster copies, colossal in size, of famous
antique statues. It is strange that Naples, while possessing some of the
greatest masterpieces of ancient sculptors, should be satisfied with these
plastic monstrosities for the adornment of its most fashionable promenade.
The most interesting feature of the Villa Nazionale is the Aquarium. It is
not merely a show place, but an international biological station, and, in
fact, the portion open to the public consists only of the spare tanks of
the laboratory. This institution is the most important of its kind in
Europe, and is supported by the principal European Universities, who each
pay for so many "tables."

 

At the entrance to the tunneled highway known as the Grotto di Posilipo,
which burrows through the promontory that forms the western bulwark of
Naples, and serves as a barrier to shut out the noise of that overgrown
city, is a columbarium known as Virgil's Tomb. The guide-books, with their
superior erudition, speak rather contemptuously of this historic spot as
the "so-called tomb of Virgil." Yet historical evidence seems to point to
the truth of the tradition which has assigned this spot as the place where
Virgil's ashes were once placed. A visit to this tomb is a suitable
introduction to the neighborhood of which Virgil seems to be the tutelary
genius. Along the sunny slopes of Posilipo the poet doubtless occasionally
wended his way to the villa of Lucullus, at the extreme end of the
peninsula. Leaving the gloomy grotto, the short cut to Pozzuoli, on our
right, we begin to mount the far-famed "Corniche" of Posilipo, which
skirts the cliffs of the promontory. The road at first passes the
fashionable Mergellina suburb, fringed by an almost uninterrupted series
of villa gardens. This is, perhaps, one of the most beautiful drives in
the South of Europe. Every winding discloses views which are at once the
despair and the delight of the painter. At every turn we are tempted to
stop and feast the eyes on the glorious prospect. Perhaps of all the fine
views in and around Naples, that from the Capo di Posilipo is the most
striking, and dwells longest in the memory. At one's feet lies Naples, its
whitewashed houses glittering bright in the flood of sunshine. Beyond,
across the deep blue waters of the gulf, Vesuvius, the evil genius of this
smiling country, arrests the eye, from whose summit, like a halo,

 "A wreath of light blue vapor, pure and rare,
 Mounts, scarcely seen against the deep blue sky;

 * * * * *

 ... It forms, dissolving there,
 The dome, as of a palace, hung on high
 Over the mountains."

Portici, Torre del Greco, and Torre del' Annunziata can hardly be
distinguished in this densely populated fringe of coast-line, which
extends from Naples to Castellamare. Sometimes at sunset we have a
magnificent effect. This sea-wall of continuous towns and villages lights
up under the dying rays of the sun like glowing charcoal. The
conflagration appears to spread to Naples, and the huge city is "lit up
like Sodom, as if fired by some superhuman agency." This atmospheric
phenomenon may remind the imaginative spectator of the dread possibilities
afforded by the proximity of the ever-threatening volcano towering in
terrorem over the thickly populated plain. There is a certain weird charm
born of impending danger, which gives the whole district a pre-eminence in
the world of imagination. It has passed through its baptism of fire; and
who knows how soon "the dim things below" may be preparing a similar fate
for a city so rashly situated? These dismal reflections are, however, out
of place on the peaceful slopes of Posilipo, whose very name denotes
freedom from care.

The shores of this promontory are thickly strewed with Roman ruins, which
are seldom explored owing to their comparative inaccessibility. Most of
the remains, theaters, temples, baths, porticoes, and other buildings,
whose use or nature defies the learning of the antiquary, are thought to
be connected with the extensive villa of the notorious epicure Vedius
Polio. Traces of the fish-tanks for the eels, which Seneca tells us were
fed with the flesh of disobedient slaves, are still visible. Descending
the winding gradients of Posilipo, we get the first glimpse of the lovely
little Bay of Pozzuoli. The view is curious and striking. So deeply and
sharply indented is the coast, and so narrow and tortuous are the channels
that separate the islands Ischia, Procida, and Nisida, that it is
difficult to distinguish the mainland. We enjoy a unique panorama of land
and sea, islands, bays, straits, capes, and peninsulas all inextricably
intermingled.

Continuing our journey past the picturesque town of Pozzuoli, its
semi-oriental looking houses clustered together on a rocky headland, like
Monaco, we reach the hallowed ground of the classical student. No one who
has read his Virgil or his Horace at school can help being struck by the
constant succession of once familiar names scattered so thickly among the
dry bones of the guide-books. The district between CumÃ¦ and Pozzuoli is
the sanctum sanctorum of classical Italy, and "there is scarcely a spot
which is not identified with the poetical mythology of Greece, or
associated with some name familiar in the history of Rome." Leaving
Pozzuoli, we skirt the PhlegrÃ¦an Fields, which, owing to their
malaria-haunted situation, still retain something of their ancient
sinister character. This tract is, however, now being drained and
cultivated a good deal. That huge mound on our right, looking like a
Celtic sepulchral barrow, is Monte Nuovo, a volcano, as its name denotes,
of recent origin. Geologically speaking, it is a thing of yesterday,
being thrown up in the great earthquake of September 30th, 1538, when, as
Alexandre Dumas graphically puts it, "One morning Pozzuoli woke up, looked
around, and could not recognize its position; where had been the night
before a lake was now a mountain." The lake referred to is Avernus, a name
familiar to all through the venerable and invariably misquoted classical
tag, facilis descensus Averni , etc. This insignificant-looking volcanic
molehill is the key to the physical geography of the whole district.
Though the upheaval of Monte Nuovo has altered the configuration of the
country round, the depopulation of this deserted but fertile country is
due, not to the crater, but to the malaria, the scourge of the coast. The
scarcity of houses on the western horn of the Bay of Naples is very
marked, especially when contrasted with the densely populated sea-board on
the Castellamare side. Leaving Monte Nuovo we come to a still more fertile
tract of country, and the luxuriant vegetation of these Avernine hills
"radiant with vines" contrasts pleasingly with the gloomy land "where the
dusky nation of Cimmeria dwells" of the poet. The mythological traditions
of the beautiful plain a few miles farther on, covered with vineyards and
olive-groves and bright with waving corn-fields, where Virgil has placed
the Elysian Fields, seem far more appropriate to the landscape as we see
it. Perhaps a sense of the dramatic contrast was present in the poet's
mind when he placed the Paradiso and the Inferno of the ancients so near
together.

Quite apart from the charm with which ancient fable and poetry have
invested this district, the astonishing profusion of ruins makes it
especially interesting to the antiquary. A single morning's walk in the
environs of BaiÃ¦ or CumÃ¦ will reveal countless fragmentary monuments of
antiquities quite outside of the stock ruins of the guide-books, which the
utilitarian instincts of the country people only partially conceal, Roman
tombs serving as granaries or receptacles for garden produce, temples
affording stable-room for goats and donkeys, amphitheaters half-concealed
by olive-orchards or orange-groves, walls of ancient villas utilized in
building up the terraced vineyards; and, in short, the trained eye of an
antiquary would, in a day's walk, detect a sufficient quantity of antique
material almost to reconstruct another Pompeii. But though every acre of
this antiquary's paradise teems with relics of the past, and though every
bay and headland is crowded with memories of the greatest names in Roman
history, we must not linger in this supremely interesting district, but
must get on to the other beautiful features of the Gulf of Naples.

Capri, as viewed from Naples, is the most attractive and striking feature
in the Bay. There is a kind of fascination about this rocky island-garden
which is felt equally by the callow tourist making his first visit to
Italy, and by the seasoned traveller who knew Capri when it was the center
of an art colony as well known as is that of Newlyn at the present day. No
doubt Capri is now considered by super-sensitive people to be as
hopelessly vulgarized and hackneyed as the Isle of Man or the Channel
Isles, now that it has become the favorite picknicking ground of shoals of
Neapolitan excursionists; but that is the fate of most of the beautiful
scenery in the South of Europe, if at all easy of access. These fastidious
minds may, however, find consolation in the thought that to the noisy
excursionists, daily carried to and from Naples by puffing little
cockle-shell steamers, the greater part of the island will always remain
an undiscovered country. They may swarm up the famous steps of Anacapri,
and even penetrate into the Blue Grotto, but they do not, as a rule, carry
the spirit of geographical research farther.

The slight annoyance caused by the great crowds is amply compensated for
by the beauties of the extraordinarily grand scenery which is to be found
within the island desecrated by memories of that "deified beast Tiberius,"
as Dickens calls him. What constitutes the chief charm of the natural
features of Capri are the sharp contrasts and the astonishing variety in
the scenery. Rugged precipices, in height exceeding the cliffs of
Tintagel, and in beauty and boldness of outline surpassing the crags of
the grandest Norwegian fiords, wall in a green and fertile garden-land
covered with orange-orchards, olive-groves, and corn-fields. Cruising
round this rock-bound and apparently inaccessible island, it seems a
natural impregnable fortress, a sea-girt Gibraltar guarding the entrance
of the gulf, girdled round with precipitous crags rising a thousand feet
sheer out of the sea, the cliff outline broken by steep ravines and rocky
headlands, with outworks of crags, reefs, and Titanic masses of tumbled
rocks.

These physical contrasts are strikingly paralleled in the history of the
island. This little speck on the earth's surface, now given up solely to
fishing, pastoral pursuits, and the exploitation of tourists, and as
little affected by public affairs as if it were in the midst of the
Mediterranean, instead of being almost within cannon-shot of the
metropolis of South Italy, has passed through many vicissitudes, conquered
in turn by Phoenicians, Greeks, and Romans; under Rome little known and
used merely as a lighthouse station for the benefit of the corn-galleys
plying from Sicily to Naples, till the old Emperor Augustus took a fancy
to it, and used it as a sanatorium for his declining years. Some years
later we find this isolated rock in the occupation of the infamous
Tiberius, as the seat of government from which he ruled the destinies of
the whole empire. Then, to run rapidly through succeeding centuries, we
find Capri, after the fall of Rome, sharing in the fortunes and
misfortunes of Naples, and losing all historic individuality till the
beginning of the present century, when the Neapolitan Gibraltar became a
political shuttlecock, tossed about in turn between Naples, England, and
France; and now it complacently accepts the destiny Nature evidently
marked out for it, and has become the sanatorium of Naples, and the Mecca
of artists and lovers of the picturesque.

One cannot be many hours in Capri without being reminded of its tutelary
genius Tiberius. In fact as Mr. A. J. Symonds has forcibly expressed it,
"the hoof-print of illustrious crime is stamped upon the island." All the
 religio loci , if such a phrase is permissible in connection with
Tiberius, seems centered in this unsavoury personality. We cannot get away
from him. His palaces and villas seem to occupy every prominent point in
the island. Even the treasure-trove of the antiquary bears undying witness
to his vices, and shows that Suetonius, in spite of recent attempts to
whitewash the Emperor's memory, did not trust to mere legends and fables
for his biography. Even the most ardent students of Roman history would
surely be glad to be rid of this forbidding spectre that forces itself so
persistently on their attention. To judge by the way in which the simple
Capriotes seek to perpetuate the name of their illustrious patron, one
might almost suppose that the Emperor, whose name is proverbial as a
personification of crime and vice, had gone through some process akin to
canonization.

Capri, though still famous for beautiful women, whose classic features,
statuesque forms, and graceful carriage, recall the Helens and the
Aphrodites of the Capitol and Vatican, and seem to invite transfer to the
painter's canvas, can no longer be called the "artist's paradise." The
pristine simplicity of these Grecian-featured daughters of the island,
which made them invaluable as models, is now to a great extent lost. The
march of civilization has imbued them with the commercial instinct, and
they now fully appreciate their artistic value. No casual haphazard
sketches of a picturesque group of peasant girls, pleased to be of service
to a stranger, no impromptu portraiture of a little Capriote fisher-boy,
is now possible. It has become a "sitting" for a consideration, just as if
it took place in an ordinary Paris atelier or a Rome studio. The idea that
the tourist is a gift of Providence, sent for their especial benefit, to
be looked at in the same light as are the "kindly fruits of the earth,"
recalls to our mind the quaint old Indian myth of Mondamin, the beautiful
stranger, with his garments green and yellow, from whose dead body sprang
up the small green feathers, afterwards to be known as maize. However, the
Capriotes turn their visitors to better account than that; in fact, their
eminently practical notions on the point appear to gain ground in this
once unsophisticated country, while the recognized methods of agriculture
remain almost stationary. The appearance of a visitor armed with
sketch-book or camera is now the signal for every male and female Capriote
within range to pose in forced and would-be graceful attitudes, or to
arrange themselves in unnatural conventional groups: aged crones sprout
up, as if by magic, on every doorstep; male loungers "lean airily on
posts"; while at all points of the compass bashful maidens hover around,
each balancing on her head the indispensable water-jar. These vulgarizing
tendencies explain why it is that painters are now beginning to desert
Capri.

But we are forgetting the great boast of Capri, the Blue Grotto. Everyone
has heard of this famous cave, the beauties of which have been described
by Mr. A. J. Symonds in the following graphic and glowing picture in
prose: Entering the crevice-like portal, "you find yourself transported to
a world of wavering, subaqueous sheen. The grotto is domed in many
chambers; and the water is so clear that you can see the bottom, silvery,
with black-finned fishes diapered upon the blue-white sand. The flesh of a
diver in this water showed like the face of children playing at
snap-dragon; all around him the spray leaped up with living fire; and when
the oars struck the surface, it was as though a phosphorescent sea had
been smitten, and the drops ran from the blades in blue pearls." It must,
however, be remembered that these marvels can only be perfectly seen on a
clear and sunny day, and when, too, the sun is high in the sky. Given
these favorable conditions, the least impressionable must feel the magic
of the scene, and enjoy the shifting brilliancy of light and color. The
spectators seem bathed in liquid sapphire, and the sensation of being
enclosed in a gem is strange indeed. But we certainly shall not experience
any such sensation if we explore this lovely grotto in the company of the
noisy and excited tourists who daily arrive in shoals by the Naples
steamer. To appreciate its beauties the cave must be visited alone and at
leisure.

Those who complain of the village of Capri being so sadly modernized and
tourist-ridden will find at Anacapri some of that Arcadian simplicity they
are seeking, for the destroying (Ã¦sthetically speaking) fingers of
progress and civilization have hardly touched this secluded mountain
village, though scarcely an hour's walk from the "capital" of the island.

We will, of course, take the famous steps, and ignore the excellently
engineered high-road that winds round the cliffs, green with arbutus and
myrtle, in serpentine gradients, looking from the heights above mere loops
of white ribbon. Anacapri is delightfully situated in a richly cultivated
table-land, at the foot of Monte Solaro. Climbing the slopes of the
mountain, we soon reach the Hermitage, where we have a fine bird's-eye
view of the island, with Anacapri spread out at our feet, and the town of
Capri clinging to the hillsides on our right. But a far grander view
rewards our final climb to the summit. We can see clearly outlined every
beautiful feature of the Bay of Naples, with its magnificent coast-line
from Misenum to Sorrento in prominent relief almost at our feet, and
raising our eyes landwards we can see the Campanian Plain till it is
merged in the purple haze of the Apennines. To the south the broad expanse
of water stretches away to the far horizon, and to the right this
incomparable prospect is bounded by that "enchanted land" where

 "Sweeps the blue Salernian bay,
 With its sickle of white sand."

and on a very clear day we can faintly discern a purple, jagged outline,
which shows where "PÃ¦stum and its ruins lie."

In spite of the undeniable beauties of Capri, it seems so given up to
artists and amateur photographers that it is a relief to get away to a
district not quite so well known. We have left to the last, as a fitting
climax, the most beautiful bit of country, not only in the neighborhood of
Naples, but in the whole of South Italy. The coast-road from Castellamare
to Sorrento, Positano, and Amalfi offers a delightful alternation and
combination of the softest idyllic scenery with the wildest and most
magnificent mountain and crag landscape. In fact, it is necessary to
exercise some self-restraint in language and to curb a temptation to
rhapsodize when describing this beautiful region. The drive from Naples to
Castellamare is almost one continuous suburb, and the change from this
monotonous succession of streets of commonplace houses to the beautiful
country we reach soon after leaving the volcanic district at Castellamare
is very marked. In the course of our journey we cannot help noticing the
bright yellow patches of color on the beach and the flat house-tops. This
is the wheat used for the manufacture of macaroni, of which Torre dell'
Annunziata is the great center. All along the road the houses, too, have
their loggias and balconies festooned with the strips of finished macaroni
spread out to dry. All this lights up the dismal prospect of apparently
never-ending buildings, and gives a literally local color to the district.
There is not much to delay the traveller in Castellamare, and soon after
leaving the overcrowded and rather evil-smelling town we enter upon the
beautiful coast-road to Sorrento. For the first few miles the road runs
near the shore, sometimes almost overhanging the sea. We soon get a view
of Vico, picturesquely situated on a rocky eminence. The scenery gets
bolder as we climb the Punta di Scutola. From this promontory we get the
first glimpse of the beautiful Piano di Sorrento. It looks like one vast
garden, so thickly is it covered with vineyards, olive groves, and orange
and lemon orchards, with an occasional aloe and palm tree to give an
Oriental touch to the landscape. The bird's-eye view from the promontory
gives the spectator a general impression of a carpet, in which the
prevailing tones of color are the richest greens and gold. Descending to
this fertile plateau, we find a delightful blending of the sterner
elements of the picturesque with the pastoral and idyllic. The plain is
intersected with romantic, craggy ravines and precipitous, tortuous
gorges, resembling the ancient stone quarries of Syracuse, their rugged
sides covered with olives, wild vines, aloes, and Indian figs. The road to
Amalfi here leaves the sea and is carried through the heart of this rich
and fertile region, and about three miles from Sorrento it begins to climb
the little mountain range which separates the Sorrento plain from the Bay
of Salerno.

We can hardly, however, leave the level little town, consecrated to
memories of Tasso, unvisited. Its flowers and its gardens, next to its
picturesque situation, constitute the great charm of Sorrento. It seems a
kind of garden-picture, its peaceful and smiling aspect contrasting
strangely with its bold and stern situation. Cut off, a natural fortress,
from the rest of the peninsula by precipitous gorges, like Constantine in
Algeria, while its sea-front consists of a precipice descending sheer to
the water's edge, no wonder that it invites comparison with such
dissimilar towns as Grasse, Monaco, Amalfi and Constantine, according to
the aspect which first strikes the visitor. After seeing Sorrento, with
its astonishing wealth of flowers, the garden walls overflowing with
cataracts of roses, and the scent of acacias, orange and lemon flowers
pervading everything, we begin to think that, in comparing the outlying
plain of Sorrento to a flower-garden, we have been too precipitate.
Compared with Sorrento itself, the plain is but a great orchard or
market-garden. Sorrento is the real flower-garden, a miniature Florence,
"the village of flowers and the flower of villages."

We leave Sorrento and its gardens and continue our excursion to Amalfi and
Salerno. After reaching the point at the summit of the Colline del Piano,
whence we get our first view of the famous Isles of the Syrens, looking
far more picturesque than inviting, with their sharp, jagged outline, we
come in sight of a magnificent stretch of cliff and mountain scenery. The
limestone precipices extend uninterruptedly for miles, their outline
broken by a series of stupendous pinnacles, turrets, obelisks, and
pyramids cutting sharply into the blue sky-line. The scenery, though so
wild and bold is not bleak and dismal. The bases of these towering
precipices are covered with a wild tangle of myrtle, arbutus, and
tamarisk, and wild vines and prickly pears have taken root in the ledges
and crevices. The ravines and gorges which relieve the uniformity of this
great sea-wall of cliff have their lower slopes covered with terraced and
trellised orchards of lemons and oranges, an irregular mass of green and
gold. Positano, after Amalfi, is certainly the most picturesque place on
these shores, and, being less known, and consequently not so much
reproduced in idealized sketches and "touched up" photographs as Amalfi,
its first view must come upon the traveller rather as a delightful
surprise. Its situation is curious. The town is built along each side of a
huge ravine, cut off from access landwards by an immense wall of
precipices. The houses climb the craggy slopes in an irregular
ampitheater, at every variety of elevation and level, and the views from
the heights above give a general effect of a cataract of houses having
been poured down each side of the gorge. After a few miles of the grandest
cliff and mountain scenery we reach the Capo di Conca, which juts out into
the bay, dividing it into two crescents. Looking west, we see a broad
stretch of mountainous country, where

 "... A few white villages
 Scattered above, below, some in the clouds,
 Some on the margins of the dark blue sea,
 And glittering through their lemon groves, announce
 The region of Amalfi."

To attempt to describe Amalfi seems a hopeless task. The churches, towers,
and arcaded houses, scattered about in picturesque confusion on each side
of the gigantic gorge which cleaves the precipitous mountain, gay with the
rich coloring of Italian domestic architecture, make up an indescribably
picturesque medley of loggias, arcades, balconies, domes, and cupolas,
relieved by flat, whitewashed roofs. The play of color produced by the
dazzling glare of the sun and the azure amplitude of sea and sky gives
that general effect of light, color, sunshine, and warmth of atmosphere
which is so hard to portray, either with the brush or the pen. Every nook
of this charming little rock-bound Eden affords tempting material for the
artist, and the whole region is rich in scenes suggestive of poetical
ideas.

When we look at the isolated position of this once famous city, shut off
from the rest of Italy by a bulwark of precipices, in places so
overhanging the town that they seem to dispute its possession with the
tideless sea which washes the walls of the houses, it is not easy to
realize that it was recognized in mediÃ¦val times as the first naval Power
in Europe, owning factories and trading establishments in all the chief
cities of the Levant, and producing a code of maritime laws whose leading
principles have been incorporated in modern international law. No traces
remain of the city's ancient grandeur, and the visitor is tempted to look
upon the history of its former greatness as purely legendary.

The road to Salerno is picturesque, but not so striking as that between
Positano and Amalfi. It is not so daringly engineered, and the scenery is
tamer. Vietri is the most interesting stopping-place. It is beautifully
situated at the entrance to the gorge-like valley which leads to what has
been called the "Italian Switzerland," and is surrounded on all sides by
lemon and orange orchards. Salerno will not probably detain the visitor
long, and, in fact, the town is chiefly known to travellers as the
starting-place for the famous ruins of PÃ¦stum.

These temples, after those of Athens, are the best preserved, and
certainly the most accessible, of any Greek ruins in Europe, and are a
lasting witness to the splendor of the ancient Greek colony of Poseidonia
(PÃ¦stum). " Non cuivis homini contingit adire Corinthum ," says the poet,
and certainly a visit to these beautiful ruins will make one less regret
the inability to visit the Athenian Parthenon. Though the situation of
the PÃ¦stum Temple lacks the picturesque irregularity of the Acropolis,
and the Temple of Girgenti in Sicily, these ruins will probably impress
the imaginative spectator more. Their isolated and desolate position in
the midst of this wild and abandoned plain, without a vestige of any
building near, suggest an almost supernatural origin, and give a weird
touch to this scene of lonely and majestic grandeur. There seems a
dramatic contrast in bringing to an end at the solemn Temples of PÃ¦stum
our excursion in and around Naples. We began with the noise, bustle, and
teeming life of a great twentieth-century city, and we have gone back some
twenty-five centuries to the long-buried glory of Greek civilization.

